YouTube review — solo male action-genre purist ("Matt"; Hard Target/Cobra posters, 90s direct-to-video canon), Atomic Blonde
[Auto-caption transcript, user-supplied 2026-06-16. Some profanity bleeped as [ __ ] —
profanity counts MASKED. Disposition coded from discourse: apolitical action-genre
purist, masculine-canon connoisseur; NOT conservative-political. Notable for the
appetitive (non-purity, non-critique) response to the sex scene.]

I'm not sure how long this video will be cuz I don't really know what I'm going to say. Atomic Blonde. As of right now, do I hate the film? No, because I would still rather watch this film than say Wonder Woman, my opinion, or Alien Covenant, or Baywatch, or even XXX Xander Cage part three, among other stuff. Although, if you ask I mean, I know that for sure from now to the end of time. As for whether this be a rant, maybe ask me again by the end of the video, or at least ask me again by the end of the year. Because I liked Charlize Theron. I liked her as an actress. I liked her in Mad Max: Fury Road. I liked her Hell, I liked her in Mighty Joe Young, for crying out loud. She was Her acting was not the problem in Prometheus. Everything else was, including the acting I mean, the the writing. See, those damn it [ __ ] up already. But I like Charlize Theron as an actress. I think she did a good job in here. The When the action is there, I liked it. It was well choreographed. Definitely no [ __ ] frantic editing. Definitely no shaky cam. There's one scene in particular involving a stair way staircase. And it's like, "Wow, it looks like they did it in one shot the way they did it." That it's I thought well choreographed. It leads from inside to outside. Almost was like it was one take. I I thought that was very impressive. I liked the music, some of the soundtrack choices. You have the song, "I Want Your Father Figure" with George Michael. "Under Pressure" by Queen David Bowie. Speaking of David Bowie, they even had that song from Cat People. And I'm not even the biggest fan of the song, but it was just And at least it was interesting. And it's not a song I hear too many times in a movie. I'm like, "Is that [ __ ] song from Cat People?" That I'm like, "Wow, that's different." And quite a few of the songs I enjoyed. So, I enjoyed the soundtrack. I enjoyed Charlize Theron. James McAvoy did not annoy the piss out of me like he usually does. I will admit that. John Goodman, it's nice to see him in the movie. Always nice to see him. I enjoyed John Goodman. Liked him in Kong: Skull Island for the little bits that he had. But this movie was disappointing. It was really disappointing. And This is from a guy, you know me. I The type of movies I like. Action movies. You know, I mean, you have Hard Target and Cobra posters on my wall. Some of my favorite action movies. I love the Rambo films. Going to the '90s, I love direct-to-video films like Blood and Bone and Well, that's not the '90s, but Riot with Gary Daniels, Last Man Standing with Jeff Wincott, as well as Last Man Standing with Bruce Willis. I enjoy those. I enjoy that one in the theaters, but like just direct-to-video. I like Drive with Mark Dacascos, Deadly Outbreak with Jeff Speakman, as well as Street Knight. And then I mean, I could go on. Speed with Keanu Reeves in theaters, you know, The Perfect Weapon, early Seagal films, Van Damme. I mean, if you've watched my channel, you already know this. But even this year, I enjoyed John Wick 2. I enjoyed Kong: Skull Island. Hell, I enjoyed Kidnap with Halle Berry a lot more than this, because this film has three flaws. Well, no. It has more flaws than that, but the four major flaws for me is the pacing, the writing, the lighting, and the lack of action. When I look at the trailers to this film and the marketing, it seems like this film would have had a lot more action than it did. I counted five. And granted, I'm sure you can name other action films that I do love that happen to have five, but here maybe if the other stuff around them mattered more, I wouldn't have complained about that. But for an hour and 48-minute movie, give or take, and of those five action scenes, I would say three of them were worth anything. One was okay, and one was nothing, which I'll get to. The the pacing, I don't think this film needed to be an hour and almost an hour and 50-minute movie. I think if they cut stuff down to 90 minutes, as well as add like another few two or three action scenes, along with others, I think it would have helped. I do think pacing's a problem. The writing, cuz anytime an action scene's not happening, it's fairly boring. It's fairly tedious to watch. It doesn't help that the lighting You know, but when I watched the trailer, I thought, "Oh, that's cool. This lighting sort of this blue type of lighting." In a way, kind of like this top here here if I get closer, this blue lighting everywhere. But that's most of the film is that light. Once in a while, I get a little pink here or something there, but I wish there were more colors. Just when most of the film has this sort of almost dull, dreary blue type of light, light blue light, it just it almost made me feel physically tired. I'm like, "Are you [ __ ] trying to go black and white or color? Like, pick one." And it's like, "Okay, it is add some colors and some life to it. Get some neon in there." Like, you steal the color scheme from What was that [ __ ] movie? That was a It was a Ryan Gosling film. God doesn't I can't remember it, but it's I hated the movie, but I liked the color scheme. Hell, it's just been other movies. Take their color scheme and put it in this. It's like it may Again, it felt It's like when I saw a film called Maggie with Arnold Schwarzenegger. Schwarzenegger's performance was good, but everything else, especially the the way the film looked, it almost had you know, like it wasn't black and white, but it was as close as black and white. That was more gray. This one is blue. I I I'm sure I'm the only one that thinks that, but I just didn't like this. A lot of the film looked just like one color to me. And I'm like, "Change it up. Instead of this sort of faint blue tinge color thing you're doing." I'm like have a lot more common color or a lot more variety of colors. Have some more This really pops with green in this scene. This really pops with red in this scene. Like, the only time I saw a difference was maybe the club when I saw some pink and maybe the a little bit in the last shootout. But may especially the pacing and the writing, cuz when there's no action, the dialogue is just about this list, cuz it's a spy film that takes place in 1989 when the Berlin Wall is falling. And this guy has died who has this list, and you've seen this in so many spy films, the list where it has all the names of the operatives, and they got to get the list back, or otherwise everyone will be have their identities leaked. How the Throw random movie out there, Mercury Rising, which I enjoyed more than this with Bruce Willis and Alec Baldwin. That was a kid who had What was the exact term he had? But he was special. I think Simon was the character's name, and he saw this code in a book. And Oh, well, you have the scene with Alec Baldwin talking to Bruce Willis. You know, he'll We got to protect our operatives out there, and their real names and real this and that. So many films, whether they're a spy genre or action genre, have done with that idea and that plot, and so generic. On the flip side, you could say, "Well, Matt, there's a lot of films you like that have a generic plot." But they're doing more interesting stuff within those plots. Like, even the John Wick films, which this is one of the directors who did the first John Wick. There was two directors who did the first John Wick. Then one did John Wick 2, and the other did this film. And I think the guy who did John Wick 2 did a better job, cuz at least Okay, guy gets [ __ ] over. He wants revenge. He's got to do this job. He's pushed pulled back in. He wants revenge cuz he got [ __ ] over. You could say this is a generic plot, but he's doing interesting stuff with his dial with some bits of how they worked the dialogue in, or scenarios, whether it be humor based, Keanu Reeves and Common are both trying to shoot each other, but being nonchalant, whether it be world based, where you can't fight here. It's the rules. It's the hotel. Why don't you guys go off and have a drink? Or you use of the the homeless, where even the [ __ ] homeless could be hit men. Like, it it did interest me still with its plot. So, that or to you take generic plot and make it interesting. This film to me didn't really do that with its script. Cuz it's all about this list, the list, the list. Every [ __ ] time someone's talking, whether it's Charlize Theron being interrogated and a lot of the film is flashback and they're talking about where's the list? Did you find this list? This guy has the list. James McAvoy, he's there. I'm looking for the list. You memorized the list? And the guy who he talks to, I memorized the list. I know all the people on the list. These other people, where's the list? Charlize Theron talking to James McAvoy, do you know where the list is? What's the list? Where's the list? How's the list? What's on the list? Where's the list? That's all it was. It got boring real fast, real quick. And when the dialogue scenes were fairly boring, it was a very generic trying to be a twist within a twist, but it wasn't that interesting. Wasn't intriguing. How the only twist I liked was when instead of the typical woman who has sex with the guy, it's Charlize Theron having sex with another woman. I'm like, cool. She's into women, I'm into women. And it made it at least a little bit different. A little bit sexy. We see some titties, but hey. Not going to fault the film for that. It's just at the end of the day, the film was pretty mediocre. When I really think about it, and that's disappointing. I'm like, isn't this the director who's going to do Deadpool 2? And it's like, it's Oh, she's a double agent. Oh, no, she's a triple agent. And she's really working for the US the whole time. And it's like, I don't care. And the script needed a lot of work. It needed more action. It needed a tighter pace. Really did. All right, so it takes place in 1989. This one guy gets killed, crushed, shot. Uh Charlize Theron, she's looking over injuries. And I think that's around the scene where it's like, is that the song from Cat People? Which is interesting. She goes in, she sits down, she gets interrogated by two people. One of them is John Goodman. And then she tells about what happened in Berlin. She has this Russian contact named James McAvoy. She's sent him to help find this list. If I talk about the five fight scenes, these are or the five Well, they pretty much except the last one. All right. The five action scenes again in the movie. The first one. She is picked up. There's this little fight in a car where she uses her shoe. Makes the car flip over. It was okay. Number two, it's a scene you saw quite a bit of it in the trailer. I like the usage of the song Father Figure by George Michael. She fights these cops, good choreography, use the thing that whips a guy down around his neck. Uh beats these cops up. She swings, the guy gets pulled, swings to the s- gets to the ground. And that's where the scene, if you watched the trailer, where these two cops here, and she beats one, hits one, hits the other hits the other. I will say Charlize Theron looked a little slow. Maybe that's just me, but she looked a little bit slower in her fighting. I don't know if that was supposed to be more realistic or it seemed as if when Keanu Reeves did his fights, it seemed a bit faster. And Charlize Theron seemed a little bit slower in her fights. I don't know, maybe that's just me. Maybe I'm looking more into it. I mean, it it's not like it bothered me, but just something I kind of noticed, and maybe I'm the only only one. But it's good choreography. I It's just it's refreshing to see fight scenes I can actually see what's going on. It's not the Jason Bourne [ __ ] of making me want to puke. Cuz it's like, edit edit edit edit edit, shaky cam. When you see a movie's not doing that, it's refreshing. But I mean, even that scene, I'm like, uh good scene, good action beat. The third one, that's where she's in this theater looking for stuff. She beats up some, like drops a shelf on one, fights a guy, and you see this silhouette, and she gets kicked through the screen. And that to me was the weakest, cuz it felt like it was 45 seconds long. Maybe it technically wasn't, but that's what it felt like. It felt like nothing. The fourth is the impressive one, where she's going in the stairway staircase. Good stunt work. It looks like Charlize Theron doing a lot of her own stuff. And it's like they're trying to do it all in one take. Fighting guys, she gets smacked in the face, she's smacking them in the face. It leads to this room, and she's picking stuff up, smacking the guy in the face. See more and more bruises on her face, him and this girl this uh guy she's trying to help. Then this car, and you have this song, I ran. I ran so far away. She shoots, the car flips over. That was an impressive scene. How it was filmed. Good choreography. I liked that. And then the final scene was decent. She's shooting some folks around the room, and uh quite use big uh big usage of slow mo in the scene. I don't know why, for some reason it doesn't bother me here, but it does in Wonder Woman. I can't explain it. I like that one of the final songs is Under Pressure by David Bowie and Queen. I liked that song. Uh but those are your five action scenes, and most of them were good. But I would call the one in the stairway staircase impressive. But yet, almost every action scene in John Wick 2 I would call impressive. Even the opening where Oh, here's this guy on a motorcycle. He flies off, and then he's just beating these people up one after the other. He gets hit by cars. Boo boo boo boo. Uh then when he's got to escape, he shoots people left and right. Pop pop pop. It just keeps going, keeps going. Then goes in the tunnel. You know, holy [ __ ] He's using shotguns, using machine guns. Like, holy [ __ ] when's it going to end? Even the fight with Common. It's like, oh [ __ ] they're going down these stairways and more stairways. And then you got some humor involved, where they crash through. You guys can't fight here. Why don't you guys have a drink? And that's what made that film interesting is that when the action started happening, first off, the cinematography I enjoyed more. It was much more of a colorful movie. So, it didn't make me feel tired by looking at it. I definitely like the look cinematography of John Wick 2 more. And the action scenes seemed like full out balls out full tilt boogie style. And here, I felt a little bit of that in the when she's fighting the cops, a little bit. And a little bit in the finale when she's shooting behind the couch. But really, the one scene I felt it in was that stairway staircase. So, out of the five, two I'm like, eh. Two I'm like, pretty good. And one I'm like, oh, cool. While all like every scene in John Wick 2 I'm like, oh, that's cool. And I saw it again on Blu-ray. I got the Blu-rays. So, it's not like I mean, it's fresh in my mind. And I only mention cuz these are the two guys who did John Wick 1, and I thought the guy who did John Wick 2 did a better job than his buddy who did this movie. And so the action scenes are good, but not mind-blowing, except a little bit of that staircase. When it's not the action, it's a very cold very soft-spoken interrogation, where Charlize Theron is talking to John Goodman and the other guy. And there's really nothing interesting or intriguing or funny or humorous or cool or art or comic books I think it's based on graphic novel. But other than you get a little bit spray paint when it goes to the locations. Or what at the end was just the end, and then go spray paint. But other than that, it's just when it's in between the action, what's there? Other than Charlize Theron and a decent soundtrack. It's just one guy gets beaten up by the bad guys. With that song, na na na, 99 Balloons, but it's in a different language. Lot of talk talk talk about the list. Where's the list? Her going to a bar, where finally you get different color, like a pink neon. Til Schweiger is in this as a guy dealing with these clocks and watches, but I don't remember what the [ __ ] else his character had to do with the movie. I really don't. Til Schweiger, I think he was in Inglourious Basterds. He's been in other stuff. I'm like, what the [ __ ] is he even doing here? One time she goes back to the club, she gets kissed by this woman who's a French agent. And I think that's the woman who was the Mummy in the Tom Cruise Mummy flick. Yeah, a little sexy scene, cool. But it's just a lot of talk talk talk about the guy. Oh, this guy memorized the list. Charlize Theron is in bed with her lover. Talk talk more talk more talk. And nothing's really that interesting or intriguing or fun or interesting. It's like a very generic boring spy movie that okay, at least you got to really throw on and the a couple action scenes from one of the guys who did John Wick 1 and some soundtrack. So it's like they're you know, someone said you took a very generic story and you gave it this nice coat of paint. But is the paint good enough to love the movie? Sometimes it is, sometimes it is and here though it's just I really liked the trailer with that Killer Queen which sadly that's not in the movie. If it is, I didn't notice. But that happens a lot in trailers where the song in the trailer is not in the movie. It's like they did have a Queen's song. It's just I think if you go into this expecting the female John Wick, you're going to be disappointed like I was. Maybe that's what it is. Then you find out James McAvoy is the bad guy cuz this guy who memorized the list and Charlize Theron and James McAvoy who's been her ally since she's been there, he's really with the bad guys and shoots that guy and that's where she's trying to help this guy who memorized the list and that's where we did the whole stairway staircase scene. Ultimately, they did get hit by a car when they're outside and he drowns and she recoups. Then James McAvoy kills the the girl from The Mummy, the mummy from The Mummy. I forget the the actress's name and they're on it's really not much. She knows where James McAvoy is at and he says something, she shoots him in the head. It's really nothing nonchalant way to kill that character. And then she finished off her interrogation with the other guy and John Goodman and then she goes to this place and you go, "Oh, she's a double agent. She's been working with the Russians the whole time." Then you find out, "No, she's actually a triple agent cuz then she shoots all those people." Where you she's behind the couch and you know, shoot someone here, shoot someone get shot in the head, shoots the bad guy and she's actually a triple agent cuz she's been working for the US the whole time. That's where you get the song Under Pressure. She has a final bit with John Goodman, they're on a plane and then the movie is over and it's the end. And I don't blame Charlize Theron. I think she's not the problem. When the action is there, it's nice but I wish some of those action scenes could have been pushed more to a full tilt boogie that some of the talking about this list could have been cut the [ __ ] down, man. And if you're going to have those scenes, give us some more with the script and the pacing. Make it a tighter paced movie. Have some more action scenes or the action scenes you do have, really balloon balloon them up. And really make this world interesting cuz I didn't find this world interesting. This world was really [ __ ] boring and those were two guys that did a good job in the first John Wick. We had David Patrick Kelly and these guys who clean these bodies up and the gold coins and the hotel. You could have done that with this but it's really nothing. Like this Til Schweiger guy who deals with these [ __ ] and watches but I have no idea what the [ __ ] even the point of that was. If there's a point to it, it went over my head cuz that's how interesting it was. I don't remember any pieces of dialogue. People like, "Oh, you don't need dialogue in action films." Really? Action films where you had stuff like one-liners? Or hell, even not one-liners. The bit in John Wick 1 where the cop comes up, "What can I get you, John?" Nah. "I'll see you later." But even that little exchange it's changed with John Wick and this cop. That was fun. That was a bit memorable. It made it a little bit interesting. You don't really I didn't I didn't really find much of that in this movie. So while between the action scenes, the five of them, it's not much in an hour and 50 minute movie when one felt like it was less than a minute and the other felt like a minute and maybe a little bit of change after that minute. When in the car she's hitting these guys two people with a shoe. When the action scenes are that far in between, you got to have something interesting for us in the middle. Charlize Theron and the soundtrack, cool but what else? This lighting, I would rather if they don't make this colorful lighting, have more colors not just 90% of this [ __ ] blue [ __ ] which literally made me tired. I don't I know that may be a statement people be confused by but it really felt that way to me like I'm getting drained from it. It also didn't help that the dialogue and the exchanges were just about this [ __ ] list. Where's the list? Where's the list? [ __ ] the list. Use the list as toilet paper. Let's do something else with this. Let's have some interesting exchanges or all this stuff going on and just where's the list and where's your contact? Do you have this contact? We got to go over here. It's just boring exposition. Boring exposition then boring exposition then boring exposition. That's what a lot of the the scenes in here are. That's what made it boring and tedious to watch. I wanted to love the movie but it was disappointing. It didn't I know I repeat myself but the reason I do this cuz sometimes I say something and then people are like, "Well, they still ask the question that I already answered." And then people will be like, "Well, that's their problem." I know but I still figure if maybe if I repeat it three times, they didn't hear it the first two times, maybe they'll hear it the third time. So again, I thought it was an okay film because Charlize Theron, the music, when the action is there and it's not Wonder Woman cuz I'd still rather watch this than Wonder Woman. But that being said, it was too long. The pace needed to be a lot tighter. The dialogue or the script, the script needed to have another pass from some I don't know. Needed a few passes, not just one, a few passes. I think it needed more action. I think you needed to differentiate the change the lighting a lot more often. Put some greens and some put some really [ __ ] off reds in there and some crazy greens in there and like you have light blues, put some really darkest [ __ ] blues and just bright white lights and if you're going to do this whole thing. There's a lot of different neon colors out there. It just It's [ __ ] Atomic Blonde. It's not called Atomic Blue. Ease off on the [ __ ] blue. So I yeah, disappointing film. I know like a friend of mine I talked to a friend of mine, he hated the film. I think he was in the same position as me where at the beginning he's like, "Yeah, I'm not sure." I talked to one of my friends Effry I'll mention. I talked with my friend Effry on Skype and he's like, "Yeah, I saw this film and yeah, it's like I didn't know what to think of it first but man, this movie just the more I thought about it, the more pissed him off and then he doesn't really like the film. I don't blame I can't really even say I'm a big fan of the movie. Like it's I liked The Kidnapping more. I liked Collateral more. I liked Get Out more. Hell, I would sadly even say I liked Guardians of the Galaxy 2 and Spider-Man: Homecoming more. And those were films I had problems with. And I'm a hardcore action fan. Like I grew up these these are the kind of movies I grew up with. So those are kind of movies hell, I saw this film called Security with Antonio Banderas which is a direct-to-video film cuz you can rent it on Amazon and such. I thought it was okay. Like I have problems with it. I think it could have needed you know, a bigger budget, more action but Antonio doing a bit more. I had problems with it but overall I I liked it. And I liked it more than this. Cuz that movie's only an hour and 31 minutes with credits. I thought the pacing was a bit tighter compared to this and I thought that I it was a good looking movie especially compared to this. It didn't have the lighting was right. It looked like a film like good cinematography. Antonio Banderas did a good job in that film too. So I'm like if you pick between the two I'd rather pick a direct video film called Security with Antonio Banderas over this film that went in the theaters and you know that tells me a lot. The fact I saw both I saw Security first and I was like it's okay but then seeing this made me like Security a little bit more. It's just one of those weird things. So Atomic Blonde at best it was okay but it's disappointing. It's pretty damn disappointing. I would say honestly it's the most disappointing film for me this year. And who knows by the end of the year maybe I will be ranting and and being pissed off about it but I'm like if I put it as a rant that means I'm I'm putting the same league as Alien Covenant and Wonder Woman and Baywatch and despite my problems I just can't do that. That's why I like it's okay for Charlize the music I already said why. Charlize the music the bits of action but it's disappointing man. And if people don't be like you're too harsh then you know what watch Riot with Gary Daniels. Watch Drive with Mark Dacascos. Watch Last Man Standing with Jeff Wincott. Deadly Outbreak with Jeff Speakman. These are direct video films of action in the 90s. Well how about watch films like The Last Boy Scout which has good action but has a really good [ __ ] dialogue too. Touch me Danny I'll kill you. Shh. Told you. You're going to lose. Smile you dumb [ __ ] You know he says [ __ ] like you don't like Bruce Willis looking in the mirror going you're going to lose. Smile you [ __ ] Oh yeah that's the one that doesn't do with action but deals with weird the weird but interesting fun writing. You need writing in that movie. Which is why I love The Last Boy Scout not just for the cool action which it does have and the rapport with Bruce Willis and Damon Wayans which it does have but also the stuff when the action is not happening. When you want to hit a fast forward button if you could that's when you know something's wrong. And unfortunately that's what I felt with Atomic Blonde. I'm like I wish I had a fast forward button and just [ __ ] move it. That's when you know that you're not being pulled into the movie. You're being taken out. And it's When I think of films I look forward to this year John Wick 2 succeeded. Kong: Skull Island I'm not sure if I looked forward to but I did like the trailer and I liked the film. Kidnap I looked forward to because I liked the trailer and I liked that film. Alien Covenant I didn't look forward to. Wonder Woman I didn't look forward to. The Mummy I didn't look forward to. I just watched those cuz someone said hey watch these. I go okay. Yes that's fine. They paid they bought me a ticket and I said okay. At least you got a experience out of it. But this yeah. If you disagree that's fine. I I wish I could love the film. I just don't. Thanks for watching. Take care. See you later.
