Title: The Wilderness of Mirrors
Episode #: 7
Episode ID: 4576223
Source: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/4576223-the-wilderness-of-mirrors.mp3
------------------------------------------------------------

=== EPISODE METADATA ===
Generated: 2026-01-12 01:02:07
Episode ID: 9052837
MP3 File: 9052837-ethnogenesis-pt-2-evolutionary-anarchism.mp3
Title: Ethnogenesis pt. 2: Evolutionary Anarchism
Podcast/Artist: Against the Internet
Album/Series: Fight Like An Animal
Source URL: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/9052837-ethnogenesis-pt-2-evolutionary-anarchism.mp3
========================
What is the highest technique you hope to achieve?
You have no technique.
Very good.
What are your thoughts when facing an opponent?
Greetings friends, I'm Arnold Schroeder, and this is Fight Like an Animal.
You can find the bibliography for this episode at AgainstTheInternet.com, where you can also find my contact information,
and I encourage correspondence of all varieties.
Finally, if you want to support this work materially, check out patreon.com slash biological singularity.
Let me just mention before I get into introducing and framing this episode that I recently had a conversation with Derek Varn of the Varn vlog,
which you should check out.
It was, I thought, really interesting.
We talked a lot about the tension between local and global decision-making structures and navigating the ecological crisis
and the relationship between infrastructure and politics, and generally just sort of, you know,
had a discussion about prospects for survival and the political transformations that would be necessary to achieve it.
And, kind of, once again, I have not really hopped around too many podcasts, but once again,
I found myself talking with somebody who, from one perspective, like, there's a surface analysis where it's like,
our politics or the aesthetics that we're presenting our politics with or whatever are kind of different,
but there's a real clear unity, I feel like, with the people who I have had interview discussions,
not so much in exactly what we think, exactly what political conclusions we've come to,
but in how we reason our way to those conclusions, a shared epistemology.
And I think really, like, a lot of it is ultimately kind of reducible to, like, a sort of technical or scientific orientation.
So anyway, it was a fascinating discussion.
Derek is part of the Emancipation Network, so it's another podcast within that network that I've had a discussion with,
so please check that out, Varnvlog.
And then moving on into what we're doing today, this is going to be, I wish so badly that a few days ago,
when I was just, like, carrying the fire for this episode, I had done it then because I was physically
mentally in pretty decent shape, and I really just felt like I had, like, that I had, like, power
residing in me that I was going to bring forth into the world.
And I am really excited about this episode, but things have just been very hard physically,
and that'll probably register in how I presented, but I want to get it done.
We're going to try to do a few different things in this episode.
We are going to continue to talk about the creation of cultures as fundamentally political projects,
as things that happen because people decide that they want to live one way rather than another.
And whereas we were kind of talking about that with a real focus on Upland Southeast Asia utilizing James C. Scott's book,
and throughout kind of like a decently broad sweep of history, but definitely, like, within a historical timeframe,
today we're going to talk about the same kind of processes of ethnogenesis of changing the cultures that individuals inhabit
or of exiting those cultures to form new ones that better suit political ideals
throughout the sweep of evolution, among our distant ancestors, among other primates who are living today.
And so in the process, if you happen to listen to the Nature Nurture Death Spiral series where, you know,
I made the basic claim that all variation in political outlook ultimately reduces to variation in assessments of human nature
and that social sciences have produced these various narratives that are actually really, really damaging to our ability to shape political outcomes,
but that in order to proceed in a new direction, we really do need a body of theory on which to rely
that answers these very fundamental questions that all variants of social sciences and political orientations are ultimately presenting
some answer or another to, you know, of like, what are the human potentials with respect to aggression and hierarchy
and cooperation and egalitarianism and, you know, all these kind of like, we're going to really try to both talk about how social sciences
have rendered these questions in the past and look at the way that they have as an institution constrained political possibility
and what it would mean for, as we recurrently get to in this series, this notion that science reconceptualizing itself is the sort of like,
basis for the kind of revolution that's capable of saving the world from total destruction
and that a sort of like parallel form of social sciences could emerge from political projects and be the basis for future political projects
and that we're going to, you know, we're going to like, talk about it on that level, but then we're also really going to try to like,
dig in to the substance of that question, maybe a little further than we ever have, and then so this will also be, it's, you know,
I'm doing these, these episodes are acts of synthesis, so I'm sorry that they do not always fit into super concise conceptual parameters.
That really is the whole point though, right? The point is that things are complex and sometimes you have to engage that complexity.
So like, we can't do that, we can't critique the existing forms of social science and how they render humanity or promulgate
and alternate social sciences with a new rendering of humanity that allows for greater political possibility
without assessing in some meaningful way the relationship between technology and domination and hierarchy.
And so we're going to try to set, to both do that and set ourselves up in particular in the next episode to talk about ways to get free
with all this, you know, with all these means of coercion laying around at people's disposal with all these surveillance drones and barbed wire fences and all the rest.
So this should be a big grandiose sweeping adventure through the entire course of human evolution and what it all means for the possibilities for survival today.
So today I'm particularly grateful for coffee.
Okay, so there's a fundamental assumption animating this podcast and really most discussions of like the core evolved behavioral repertoire of humans that I guess I haven't really ever stated explicitly.
It feels like I probably should even though I understand most people are making the same assumption most of the time who are listening to this podcast.
But the assumption is that what we consciously experience of our behaviors, and in particular what we choose to say about them are often post hoc assessments or rationalizations or descriptions or whatever,
that we might really think that we reason our way to all of our behaviors, but our behaviors emerge from other processes deep within our neurophysiology and wherever else that, you know, we talk about as a post hoc phenomenon and justify in many cases as a post hoc phenomenon.
In phrase in terms of brain structure, we might say that the behavior comes from deep within the brain. And what we say about the behavior comes from more recently evolved in exterior regions, right.
So, for example, the really strange collection of traits, logically unrelated traits that correlate with left right political perception that we've talked about on the podcast, and that lack any clear relationship to post hoc assessments.
And that lack any clear relationship to politics per se are a good indication that something other than rational language based deliberation shapes our world views, right.
It would not be the case that one's politics could be predicted from how one maintained their living space or from one's brain structure or from one's use of non political language.
People were actually reasoning their ways to their political perceptions, but of course if you ask people that's mostly what they'll tell you is true.
So that's the that's the notion of bottom up processing. It's the notion that, you know, the thing that's happening is happening on levels that we're largely not conscious of, and that us talking about it is a subsequent process.
I rarely hear people if you ask about somebody's worldview, say, I don't know why I think this it just seems like it's my nature to perceive things this way.
But to a large extent that is usually the explanation for why people perceive things the way they do, and why they behave the way they do and including in terms of their political behavior.
But I don't say all of this to negate the notion that the rationally deliberative parts of our brain can't meaningfully shape our behavior or meaningfully shape collective behavior.
I emphatically think that they can and, you know, that's the whole purpose of making these inquiries is to establish a framework for doing so.
So the reason that I am drawing out this assumption now that I've been making all along in this podcast and that is just so central to so much discussion about evolved behavioral repertoires is I want to just convince you to,
I want to kind of invoke a sense of experiential unity between what you do and experience and what other animals do and experience when there does appear to be like a significant overlap.
And in particular to convince you that even if they lack a whole bunch of terminology to throw around in relation to it, when we see other animals doing what we would kind of characterize in our own species as politics, they are doing politics.
And they're having an experience that really isn't that different than the experience we have when we engage in political conflict.
Right, like when we see some chimpanzees yelling at the alpha male and and aggression like displaying, it's not that different than being at a protest, because it's not like and I'm going to I'm going to do an episode called our protests aggressive displays at some point in the future.
That will continue to elaborate on some of these lessons for revolution that we get from primatology.
But you know, when you see chimpanzees doing something like that, it's good to keep in mind that there's a again a bunch of neural architecture that we share.
It's not that our neural architecture is like radically divergent from theirs.
So much as it is that we just have some extra architecture and that extra architecture allows us to do things like turn our incessant vocalizations into really complex symbols that you know that we can use to explicitly logically communicate something about the hierarchy that we're in that we don't like or whatever.
But that the fundamental reality of doing a bunch of vocalizations and aggressive displays at the representatives of that hierarchy pretty much the same experience chimp to human.
Here's how Franz DeWall phrases it in chimpanzee politics, which is one of the many books that we will rely on in this episode.
Humans are talking primates, but in fact their behavior is not very different from that of chimpanzees.
People engage in verbal fights, provocative or impressive word displays, protesting interruptions, conciliatory remarks and many other patterns of verbal activity that chimpanzees perform without an accompanying text.
When humans resort to actions instead of words, the resemblance is even greater.
Chimpanzees scream and shout, bang doors, throw objects, call for help, and afterward they may make up by a friendly touch or embrace.
We humans also display these patterns, usually without taking a conscious decision to do so.
And maybe our motives are not so very different from those of chimpanzees.
So there's a very long list. Perhaps we should place our discussion today in the context of the extensive sequence of ostensible dividing lines between our species and others that have broken down as we've actually observed other species.
So at some point I would say that politics like tool use and whatever else, language, culture was removed from the list of things endemic to humanity and placed on a list of traits that we share with other creatures.
And so if we take this notion seriously, we have to say that it is the case that egalitarian political struggle is something that is not, you know, that didn't start with the first international or, you know, like whatever like historical tendency one wishes to align with.
It is millions of years old, that egalitarian political struggle of the variety that we are ultimately engaged in today is a cross species phenomenon, and it is one that shaped our own like a neural architecture and fundamental nature as a species.
And so that's I've noticed that people really love to place their politics within the context of some kind of like broader tradition.
And oftentimes I actually sort of militate against how historically oriented so many people's politics are because I feel like things are so rapidly changing both in terms of our material conditions, and in terms of the knowledge that we're accumulating about ourselves.
And that it behooves us to have a politics based on very recent understandings of ourselves and assessments of recent changes in our conditions.
But at the same time, you know, if we are going to all sort of like spend some time on Twitter talking about how our politics goes back to whatever historical point of, you know, emergence and like identify ourselves with various schools of thought that have a sort of like a veneer of antiquity to them or whatever,
then I'm going to lean right in and say this is my this is the political tradition that I identify with. It's the one that's happening in baboons and chimpanzees and whatnot today, and was happening in Australopithecus and Homo erectus and whatever else on our journey to becoming human.
And indeed is a guide to the the future course of that journey and to the you know the destiny of humanity beyond the point of evolution that we are currently inhabiting.
Okay, so this political tradition this evolutionary anarchism as it were evolutionary egalitarianism or however one chooses to phrase it goes something like this.
There's a range of social structures among primates from very despotic to very egalitarian. And the egalitarian species are such because individuals of those species fought to be such and an evolution accommodated the changes that they brought about in their societies.
We're going to have much more of an opportunity to talk about rapid evolution in particular rapid evolution in these very domains that we're investigating in terms of the biology of aggression hierarchy social tolerance.
The biology that we got into at the beginning of this podcast and we'll talk about how phenotypically plastic our own and other species are and how contrary to the kind of biology that posits that most things that are interesting about an organism are the results of some random
mutation in DNA sequence that only happens very, very infrequently fortuitously turning out to be adaptive and being selected for contrary to that kind of biology we're going to talk about how organisms can respond to their developmental
conditions rapidly and radically and how that can shape the course that those organisms take evolutionary developmental biology will get into more of a we'll get into more detail about what it implies for the future of the human journey.
But for now, for this sprawling insane effort of an episode, you know, we can ask if this is true that egalitarian species of primates are such because of something that we can plausibly describe as a political struggle that took place within that
species, then of course we're going to ask like what are these political struggles like and what can we learn from them and all that. And that's where it gets really useful to it allows us to really think about what a mysterious substance power actually is, because
because if we look at the despotic species, you know, they're, they're controlled by an alpha male, or in the cases of some baboons, coalitions of like a small handful like two, three alpha males. But you know, who really shape the experience of a whole, whole, whole lot of other animals.
And what's so fascinating about this is that their status as alphas is based on their ability to fight any one of the other members of their society and when, but they sure couldn't beat up every member of their society, right.
And so that's an interesting aspect of the, of the nature of hierarchy. That's one way in which the game theory doesn't seem to work out without some additional explanatory factors. And it's really useful to keep in mind one person can only beat up so many other people.
And that places really significant constraints on what hierarchy can actually be and how intense hierarchy can be. Because to start off with one one countermeasure that members of any given primate species can take to living in a dominant hierarchy that they don't like, is to simply walk away.
So this is a characteristic of chimpanzee societies that they sometimes fission into two different groups. And this was something that happened during Jane Goodall's observations that she recorded in her classic book, chimpanzees of the Gombe, patterns of behavior.
What she watched was males of what were initially one group start to reside either in the south or the north more and more of the study of the study area of their of the groups overall territory and have fewer and fewer interactions and then for the place where those interactions did happen where they're where they're ranging kind of
overlapped to gradually shift further and further south until there was kind of this very distinct southern community. And there was a valley that they that they met males of the northern community in but they became two different chimpanzee societies, and then those two chimpanzee
societies went to war. And that was all very brutal and terrible. But for our purposes right now, what's interesting about this is that this process of fission of group fissioning among chimpanzees is, you know, essentially the same process we would imagine of ethnogenesis in humans, right?
That when we look at all of the fabulous diversity of ecological niches that humans carved out for themselves, and the fabulous diversity of geographical regions that humans ended up in, we have to imagine that there were groups of people that split up and went different ways over and over again throughout the course of the human
experience, both in terms of like, cognitively behaviorally modern humanity, and in terms of human ancestors leading up to that point. You know, the different points people were like, Okay, well, we're going to, we're going to be the people who crossed the ocean in the open canoes and live off of shellfish.
And other people were like, Oh, we're going to be the people who hunt the giant animals and live next to the glaciers. And one has to assume that this has a number of evolutionary consequences.
First of all, it like I was saying, it places sharp limits on the extent to which dominance hierarchies are absolute features of life, because they can simply be walked away from there. There is nothing about when we read about chimpanzee societies or whatever human
societies until very recently, people had all of this power over other people, whether we're talking about people who look like us or people with a little more fur and a little less language, but people always just had the power to walk away.
And so it places limits on the despotism that is practical. Here's like, where if we get into the kind of like, the, you know, like, looking at selective pressures per se, looking at what behaviors would be adaptive or non adaptive, it would seem to imply that there's a certain level of hierarchical behavior that probably would not be adaptive, because people would just, because it would just be escaped from.
But also interestingly, I think it's worth noting that the formation of new cultures would have through like a process of fissioning between a previously cohesive group would probably have a lot of evolutionary consequences, just because people temperamentally vary so much.
And it seems extremely likely to me that in certain situations of group fissioning, people with one disposition or another would be more or less likely to cluster in one group or another.
Right. So for instance, openness to new experience is a temperamental aspect of humanity that's cross culturally, durable, and highly politically predictive, more openness to new experience predicts more egalitarian politics.
And it's hard for me to imagine that such temperamental variation would have nothing to do with decisions to, you know, move into new landscapes or try whole new subsistence routines out and things like that.
So that's a way in which ethnogenesis and what, you know, we might describe as like radical cultural and political experiments in new ways of living, probably, you know, like shaped evolution.
And then we also have to imagine, I mean, if the human experience is any indication at all, if the primatological evidence is any indication at all, we have to imagine that sometimes when human societies fissioned and new cultures were formed, that it was the result of some kind of conflict.
And then we have to further assume that these sorts of conflicts were fundamentally political by definition, they were political, right, there, you know, conflicts in a group about how the group was going to behave.
And so I think it absolutely must be true that over and over again, people had a bunch of substantive disagreements that were really interesting and have like relevance to the contemporary experience and shaped evolution.
But just to keep it within this obvious realm of, you know, like answering these big questions about our potentials with respect to aggression and hierarchy or egalitarianism and cooperation and whatever else.
Some of these conflicts had to be about how hierarchical a society was, who got to exercise what forms of power.
And then a further way in which this process of fissioning must have influenced evolution is that these temperamental variations that map to political orientation in humans today, temperamental variations like openness to new experience,
more or less also just map in other species to what could be concisely described as the degree of interest in the dominance hierarchy, which is a separate dimension from an animal's ability to fight and like hypothetical ability to compete in the dominance hierarchy.
And Jane Goodall had also talked about this in chimpanzees of the Gombe patterns of behavior. It's been described, I think I touched on it in another episode in a larger chimps society elsewhere that is sometimes described as the most brutal chimpanzee society ever recorded,
which is, it's also the biggest chimpanzee society ever recorded. And those two things probably don't have nothing to do with one another.
But there's one individual there who shows this. I can't remember the name right now, but it seriously is in another one of my podcasts.
I should have checked my own bibliographies before I started the episode, but this individual, this adult male is noteworthy both for a total lack of interest in the dominance hierarchy, for being the first chimpanzee in that group who tolerated the presence of researchers,
who researchers could get close enough to to really study and who fostered an orphan, it's a very heartwarming story, fostered an orphan adolescent chimp.
So shows all of these co-varying tendencies, this openness, this social tolerance, this lack of interest in the dominance hierarchy that's characteristic of temperamental differences that map to political differences in people today.
And then, yeah, Goodall talked about this first, I believe she was the first person to touch on it, and the male chimpanzee in her study group at Gombe, who was really unique in this regard, was named Jomio.
She says, one male, Jomio, has always been remarkable for his lack of preoccupation with matters of rank.
He was first identified in 1964 when he was about eight years old. His mother, Vodka, was still alive, but was shy and seldom seen.
In 1965, Jomio, like other early adolescent males, began to challenge the community females.
Although he was often attacked and chased off, as are all youngsters at that age, he once swaggered and bristled so effectively that he was able to withstand the efforts of the high-ranking passion when she tried to chase him from a box of bananas.
In the end, they shared the fruits.
So she's setting us up to understand that Jomio does, in fact, possess the capacity for aggressive behaviors that's not the explanatory factor and why he's disinterested in the hierarchy.
And I won't enumerate, she goes on to describe a bunch of interactions and a bunch of patterns of interaction between Jomio and other members of the group that I won't enumerate in all their glorious detail.
But what she is setting us up to understand is that there does seem to be some developmental experiential factors at work here.
And she talks about another male named Mustard, who, at the time of her writing in 1986, seemed to be on a trajectory towards a similar sort of disengagement from the dominance hierarchy.
So yeah, the nature of it seems multitudinous and complex in both their cases.
She describes a history of atypical social interaction during development that really had a lot to do with their mother's social status and behaviors like the choice to kind of isolate from the group to a large extent.
And also maybe some developmental factors that, you know, in one case, in the case of Jomio, at least there was like a major injury that seemed to shift his disposition.
But I think it really also does seem to be the case that there's some in a genetic factors at work there.
And so we can easily imagine throughout the ancestral experience of humanity and in other species that have been evolving in parallel to humanity, you know, this notion of group fissioning,
ethnogenesis, kind of like dispositionally different individuals clustering into these new cultures that get formed and that having really significant evolutionary consequences.
If, you know, Jomio and Mustard and two or three of the females that Goodall was studying all kind of went off on their own way and said, you know, we just don't like this.
Like we're kind of sick of this whole scenario where we're all beating each other up all the time and whoever can beat the most people up gets to tell everybody else what to do.
And we're just going to go over here and do something else now, you know, how that would have a really significant evolutionary influence over many permutations of political revolution, ethnogenesis.
Okay, but so in terms of the other variety of political struggle, rather than the escape variety, rather than the flee the hierarchy and form a new culture variety, which, you know, I mean, we talked about last episode with tribes of upland Southeast Asia, like the Hmong, but, you know, the Hmong like process that's been happening throughout the course of evolution.
There's that kind of political resistance or political project of culture creation, but then there's the kind where you stay and fight, right, where you you militate to change conditions within your society rather than escape it and form a new one.
And there is much to be learned about how that type of political struggle was playing out among our ancestors and plays out in species evolving in parallel.
From that same fact that one hyper like even, you know, like hyper aggressive, real big, real mean male can only beat up so many people at once.
And so it's not only true that they don't really have the power to keep people within a territory and require them to be a part of the hierarchy that they've established.
But it's also true that ultimately really in species that are as socially complex as primates, there might be an alpha male and that might really mean something like every other member of that society might to that alpha male defer in matters of certain like forms of resource competition
and might engage in formal submissive behaviors when that dominant male engages in a set of formal, you know, sends us a set of formal signs of threat basically.
And all these all these other things, you know, the dominant male really might get priority over like food resources and sexual privileges and all the rest.
But at the same time, the very presence, the very status of that male as alpha may ultimately really be a function of a coalition.
There really may not be any way other than that to think about it about what coalition is ultimately in power, you know, is a whole lot like the human experience.
And so good all in chimpanzees of the Gombe presents these fascinating graphics.
Here I wish I was making a video about the coalitional and antagonistic interactions that each adult male had with one another.
And they're, you know, they're really complex.
They show like an ever-fluxing set of relationships where sometimes one chimpanzee will come to another's aid and sometimes will be in conflict with that chimpanzee.
And some of these relationships are inviolable like in some cases one chimpanzee always comes to another's aid.
In some cases it's like highly context dependent.
But who is alpha male is ultimately a function of these coalitions.
The alpha male, yes, wins a lot of fights, but also ultimately is the individual who has the most other adult males coming to his aid the most of the time.
And so that that has a couple really interesting implications.
One is that like really how we conceptualize the hierarchy itself and the notion of an alpha male has to be, we have to acknowledge that on some level power is highly distributed even in these societies that we describe as despotic, like as intensely hierarchical.
As much as we can identify an alpha male, and in the case of chimpanzees, not so much a linear dominance hierarchy where A beats up all other individuals and B submits to A, but beats up every other individual and so on and so forth.
You know, like what we actually really can find, which again is more reminiscent of the human experience, is like a few different ranks that multiple individuals occupy.
But as much as we can identify an alpha male and a hierarchy with different ranks occupied by different individuals, that whole structure is ultimately a function of very distributed power.
Every individual within that society is contributing to and shaping the nature of that hierarchy.
And then, and then the other thing that this logically inevitably implies, and that looking at Goodall's graphs for really just a moment makes really intuitively clear is that saying that saying that power is distributed and that it's constantly in flux between different coalition,
different coalitional configurations and different individuals is really equivalent to saying that chimpanzee society is more or less hierarchical at different points in time, right, that sometimes the coalitions are a little more even than others.
So, again, we can see how our distant ancestors and species evolving in parallel are doing politics all the time, and that the politics always have some aspect of that the, what we call egalitarianism in the sense that everybody's shaping the nature of power relations in a society is kind of always there.
And that it there's always some capacity, some raw material for more equal power relations to manifest out of the dominance biology of any species that has a capacity for like coalition building and complex social interactions, i.e. any primate species.
And there are some baboon species where this logic is taken to what seems like an inevitable place where there is no alpha male, but there's like a ruling coalition where it's not, you know, like in chimpanzee societies, there's an alpha and then there's these subsequent ranks essentially that multiple individuals fill.
But in baboon societies, that top rank is also filled by multiple individuals, usually just like two or three. But, you know, it is the case that these say three baboons are given undisputed power when they're all actually together.
But that if one of them is alone and challenges another male, that male may show no fear whatsoever, because again, you know, that's the hard constraint on hierarchy is that one person can only beat up so many other people.
Okay, so just to kind of like substantiate and draw out this notion that even in the species that are described as the most hierarchical and despotic power is actually a very distributed function of coalitions.
Let's look at the chimpanzees who fought a great war for power, as described in Franz De Waal's chimpanzee politics. So these are captive chimpanzees at the Arnhem Zoo.
And they differ in their behavior with respect to politics from their wild counterparts in one really crucial way that we'll get into in a little bit.
But in many respects, their political behavior is identical. But unlike chimps in the wild, every dominance interaction that they have can be documented.
So it does provide a better means of understanding this in a certain way that, you know, at a certain like scale of detail.
So De Waal describes this group with these three males who end up competing for power, Yeroen, Niki, and Luit.
And it starts with Yeroen as the undisputed alpha male. And Luit is somebody who he's known for a long time.
They're kind of old friends and they're pretty bonded. And Luit is like the number two male in terms of dominance rank.
And then Niki is younger and has really almost no status in the group.
And the sequence of power machinations is really long and intricate and super interesting.
But, you know, basically it starts with Luit beginning to challenge Yeroen.
So it's the number two challenging the number one with dominance displays and stuff like that.
And there's 72 very tense days of, like I said, like pretty complicated power machinations.
And what's interesting to know about them is that they involve Luit beating up other members of the chimpanzee group
in order to create a sense of like basically instability.
It's, you know, a political strategy that has some clear affinities with what we might call terrorism
or for that matter the logic of like disruptive protests and direct action.
You know, in either case where you're diminishing the sense of stability and inevitability in the current social order
and creating a conflict where you're forcing people to choose a side.
And so Luit, the number two, would just like literally randomly attack other members of the colony,
which were females in most cases.
And, you know, so like kind of create this political dilemma, you know,
if you've ever listened to some like babble about direct action strategy and dilemma actions
where the number one where Jeroen had to either intervene and thus risk, you know, open conflict and losing a fight
or not intervene and thus communicate to the whole group that he wasn't really in control
and couldn't really protect the other members of that colony.
But I don't have much to say about the terroristic or disruptive elements of the political strategy
per se, at least in this episode.
What I want to point out in this case is that Luit became alpha after 72 days of this like campaign of terror or whatever it was.
But largely because of the help of this third male, Niki, who had almost no status in the group up to that point in time.
But when Niki decisively allied with Luit and they started challenging and threatening Jeroen together,
that was really the end of Jeroen's regime.
And so then when Luit is alpha, a change in dynamic between Niki and Jeroen between the number three and number two
takes place where Niki starts trying to ascend in the hierarchy above the recently deposed alpha.
He starts displaying at him a bunch.
And this is where it gets all kinds of Machiavellian.
Deval speculates that Jeroen essentially allows Niki to take his place in the dominance hierarchy that he surrenders it without much of a fight.
And he thinks that might have something to do with the fact that he had just been through this very arduous campaign of power struggles that he lost
and he was just kind of tired.
But he also acknowledges that just sort of letting Niki take his place as number two
and therefore be in a position to challenge the now number one male Luit
had tremendous political advantages for Jeroen.
So Niki starts displaying at Jeroen, Jeroen lets him become number two
and this creates the basis for a power conflict between Niki and Luit
in which Jeroen sides with Niki and allows Niki to become the alpha male.
But he kind of occupies this weird.
He really is chainy to Niki's bush.
He kind of has all of this power that usually goes to the alpha male.
So everybody gives Niki a formal cue of submission.
Niki goes around trafficking informal cues of domination.
There are some unequivocal senses in which Niki is alpha.
But Jeroen as his trusted, his trusted coalitionary partner, right hand man
is the one who administers conflicts within the group, the one who breaks up fights
which had in the past always been a function of the alpha male.
He actually gets more voluntary like formal gestures of respect from the group members
than does the ostensible alpha Niki.
So, as Deval says, it may be that in 1976 Jeroen did not want any problems
with Niki for reasons of strategy.
The rivalry between Luit and Niki increased daily
and any resistance Jeroen might have offered Niki would have worked to some extent in Luit's favor.
Jeroen may already have felt there was some advantage to be gained from an increase in tension.
Between the other two males, and he may well have foreseen that this favorable situation would develop
still further if Niki were to secure the position of second ranking male.
I do not know whether chimpanzees are capable of such predictions
but the fact remains that Jeroen later benefited enormously from the confrontation between Luit and Niki.
By subordinating himself to Niki, Jeroen degraded himself
but he also maneuvered himself into the key position in the triangle.
So this again underscores this notion that you can talk about a dominance hierarchy
and it is there and it does make sense
but that the dominance hierarchy is ultimately, in this case, it's like a triangle of power
and it's only a triangle because there's three males only in this situation
in wild living chimpanzees, the configuration of power is even far more complex.
Deval talks about one male chimpanzee being kind of like
the weight in between the balance of power between two others
so he says he's talking about how Niki and Jeroen would do this thing
where when Niki started to challenge the wheat for the number one position
Jeroen would come up to him and mount him in a sexual way
and they would display at Luit together.
It's like this way chimpanzees say I am definitively on the side of this guy
because I'm kind of mock fucking him while we both display aggressively at you.
But so he says Niki, who a year earlier was half playfully hooting along with Luit
and throwing sand at Jeroen, had now done a volte face.
What is more, his behavior was far more threatening
and his influence had become much greater.
He was now more than just a weight in the balance between the two others.
The accent now was on the balance between himself and Luit
and the weights were the females and Jeroen.
So yeah, that is obviously like a pretty good validation
of this notion of distributed power among the males
but then that last thing Deval says is crucial too
this idea that the females were actually the true fundamental determinants
of the nature of the male hierarchy in the Arnhem colony
and this is the way in which the behavior of captive chimpanzees
does vary really significantly from that of wild chimpanzees
so the actual like aggressive and coalitionary behaviors
we see among the males isn't really that different
between wild and captive specimens
but in the wild females don't really participate
in any direct or particularly consequential way
in the power machinations of the males
but in the Arnhem colony and captivity they do
but it's interesting because they're not actually
none of the females are seeking these positions of power themselves
but there's more females than there are males
so if they all act as a coalition
in favor of one individual male over any others
that male has an almost unassailable once again
one person can only beat up so many people
so even if those males are capable of beating up any
given individual female on their own
they're not capable of fighting the whole group
and so the females were actually really the fundamental determinants
of which male got to occupy
which place in the dominance hierarchy
and they would do you know they were such because they actively
intervened in conflicts
because at a certain point when males were fighting
the females would just intervene on behalf of one or the other
and so in the initial power struggle
where Louis and Nicky kind of like terrorized the females
and put Euron into all of these dilemma situations
where he had to either fight and intervene
and risk losing or you know
or just kind of like let things happen
and acknowledge that he wasn't in control
the females at first displayed this really strong preference for Euron
but as Louis' challenges progressed
they eventually got kind of more and more indifferent
and then finally they started allying with Louis
and that is what pushed him into the position of power
for the time he had it until you know
the Machiavellian shit happened
where Euron and Nicky took power back away from him
but this is super interesting
because well and I'm sure this is how
I mean this must have informed their hypothesis
but this is how it is hypothesized
that bonobos became as they are
so at some point about a million years ago
a chimp-like ancestor of the bonobos
had some kind of political revolution
and set themselves onto the evolutionary path
that has made them as they are today
and bonobo societies are just not ruled by male aggression
they're ruled by coalitions of females
and so it's thought that at some point
a process very much like what has been observed in chimpanzees
at the Arnhem Zoo occurred in a wild population
where females just did intervene
in the power machinations of males
and as a result became the dominant force
because they weren't actually seeking to occupy
the roles the dominant males had
they became a different kind of force in that society
because the co-editionary dynamics are different
when there is nobody trying to become alpha
in the sense that there are alpha males among chimpanzees
so this 2011 paper called the self-domestication hypothesis
evolution of bonobo psychology
is due to selection against aggression
lays out a hypothetical evolutionary sequence
in bonobos that goes like this
this is like a bullet point version
so isolation of chimp-like ancestors
south of the Congo River roughly a million years ago
larger patch size on average
than those available to chimpanzees
more plentiful on higher quality terrestrial herbs
than those available to chimpanzees
no gorillas competing for access to feeding resources
so that isolation in more abundant habitat
leads to selection against male aggression
females form stable parties
and strong coalitions with one another
male effort to dominate or coerce females
thwarted by female coalitions
male aggression toward females and other males
hurts fitness
less aggressive males allied with female relatives
show increase in fitness
so there's a change
what they're positing is that there's a change in basic ecology
and subsistence routines
which allows for the formation of more stable female coalitions
and then we see what we saw at Arnhem
but unlike at Arnhem where females provided this decisive role
in shaping the power relations
but ultimately did sort of give it to one male or another
at some point they were like well you know
if we're the fundamental determinant of power in this society
really why give any male the power to beat us up
and fuck us when we don't want to be fucked and all the rest
and so they just kind of took that power away from males
so again the power of any one individual
is a function of the extent to which there is not
coalitions opposing that power
a coalition is a hard constraint on the power
that any one individual can possess
and you know this is kind of the central thesis
of books like Bohm's Hierarchy in the Forest
Clostrace's Society Against the State
Scott's The Art of Not Being Governed
two of which we've talked about pretty extensively
on this podcast this notion that egalitarian human societies
like when we see egalitarianism in hunter-gatherers
or in people practicing like distributed agriculture
like swiddening in Highland Southeast Asia
as in the case of The Art of Not Being Governed
in a fairly egalitarian social structure
it is such not because their cultures have completely
negated the impulse to domination altogether
but because in addition to all these cultural mechanisms
for subduing that impulse in an individual
there's just these coalitional realities that emerge
against any individual who tries to take too much power
and that there really is no way for an individual
to exert too much power against like a really big
dynamic coalition
but it is really important
I do want to put one more piece of this puzzle
into place in talking about the conditions that facilitated
the emergence of these stable female coalitions
in the Bonobo ancestor
which you know is this like occupation
of a more abundant habitat and whatnot
this is complex
I want to talk about this in a couple different ways
but to start off with
let's just note that this goes a long way to explaining
you know if we are if we're saying power is a mysterious substance
and that one individual can never beat up
all of the other individuals in a group
in a group of any significant size
as is found in say chimpanzees or humans
the reality that underscores some of the acceptance
so then of course we ask well why doesn't this just happen
automatically all the time
more commonly
why hasn't there been a Bonobo like process in every primate
one of the answers is always going to be
that there's actually a really meaningful set of trade-offs
in accepting the presence of dominant aggressive males
within a group which is that they protect
any given group member
from the aggressive males of neighboring groups
and so that is like a really significant threat
to chimpanzee for instance survival in the wild
is aggression from members of neighboring groups
and you can see if you watch videos of chimpanzees
you'll actually see times when a group is out foraging
or whatever somewhere kind of on the margins of their territory
and they encounter you know they hear or see
members of a neighboring group
and the like various group members
will run up to the alpha and embrace him for comfort
I mean it is like exactly like what the American public did
after fucking 9-11 or for that matter
what the Russian public did after whenever it was
that the FSB bombed apartment buildings
and attributed the actions to Chech and Separatists
where like when people feel a sense of threat
from an out group they tend to be much more deferential
to hierarchical authority within their own group
than otherwise this is true of humans
and it is true of chimpanzees
and it is been one of the significant constraints
on the evolution of egalitarian
it has been the fundamental constraint
on the evolution of egalitarian behavior
in our own ancestors and in species evolving in parallel
and it is the fundamental constraint
on achieving egalitarian political outcomes
in our own species today
ultimately some version of that psychology
I'm afraid of the out group
I'm gonna run up and embrace the hierarchical leader
underscores for instance the support for Donald Trump
present in our own society
but the other thing that I want to get into
and this is here again I think where we get into
it's the reason that I talked about bottom-up processing
and the fundamental unity of behaviors and experience
between ourselves and other species
at the beginning of the episode
is that I do want to kind of like
I want to break down whatever sense of barriers
exist between how we imagine this experience
would occur in other species
and how we know we would experience it ourselves
which is that there really is some aspect
of conscious agency and choice
in this positioning of oneself
towards hierarchical social structures
with respect to the sense of threat
from other group members right
where you know like I said
we can see a range of conditions
from despotic to egalitarian
playing out in different primate societies
and to some extent
that reflects variation in ecology
and variation in their material conditions
as it were but on another level
there's no absolute like this difference
that we're talking about between bonobos
and chimpanzees ecologically
you know bonobo ancestors get isolated
south of the conga river
it's more abundant life is better
it's a little easier no gorillas
but you know these are not like absolute
distinctions right like on some level
the threats especially the threats
from just other chimpanzees
you know who are also isolated south
of the conga river
and foraging without competition from gorillas
you know like some of these threats
are still present
it's always a matter of degrees
and so what I'm saying is that
different ecologies don't just
automatically produce
a given sort of like
degree of hierarchy
that there is actually some
behavioral choice to be made
and how much one is going to
choose to be afraid
and therefore to acquiesce to things
or to demand alternate configurations
and again this is true of us
but it's also been true of our ancestors
throughout evolution
and it's true of other species
and so yeah
so like I want to present that
as the fundamental axiomatic predictor
of how hierarchical a society is
is how much it experiences
a sense of threat from out groups
but that also how much it experiences
a sense of threat from out groups
is not necessarily just like
a linear function of how much
threat there is from out groups
that there's an aspect of like
temperamental variation
conscious agency
whatever that there's other factors
that go into shaping this
and that you know evolution
proceeds from these
choices that people make
and these temperamental variations
that people exhibit
people in the case of homo sapiens
or whatever
other species
I do just kind of sometimes use
the term people to describe
you know anything with eyes
that gets angry and you know
makes decisions
behaves in interesting
complex ways that have
obvious parallels to how we behave
anyway so
so there's all that this idea
of out group threat and this idea
and temperamental and conscious
variation in
how much we respond
to a sense of out group threat
as a fundamental axiomatic
predictor of hierarchy
and that grounds
our statement that
if you're fighting hierarchy
you ultimately can claim
millions of years old political tradition
because chimps,
bonobos and humans
all share a common ancestor like
five or six million years ago
and for a variety of reasons
it seems pretty clear that that ancestor
was pretty chimp like
and that both bonobos and humans
have gone on these paths
where we've dropped
some of the chimp routine
but in different ways
and this isn't just a unidimensional
thing
it is often referred to as such
it's just not
it's not a unidimensional thing
where the question is
how much more egalitarian
and like as if
it's all one
function you know like it's just one
hand how much less aggressive
have we become
and you know like bonobos kind of win
like they're the most egalitarian
and we're supposedly just somewhere
in between chimps and bonobos
like the paths have just actually been
different
and we're going to talk about that
now but
it really can be
the evidence is unequivocal
that when our most
distant ancestors that diverged
from that lineage, Australopithecus
that when Australopithecus
happened it was essentially
like a bipedal chimp
that behaviorally
we were chimps more or less
and we were exhibiting
chimp like levels
of male
dominance behaviors and hierarchy
and that over the course of evolution
there has been
some very significant
divergences
away from
that behavioral paradigm
towards something that has
for all of our complexities
and for all of the horrors
we are capable of inflicting on one
another and for all of
the intense hierarchies that we
have in fact and do in fact
currently
inhabit
there has been some really significant
evolution away from
hierarchical behavior
and as you know
if you have been listening to this podcast
for a while it is
my strong belief or I
strongly favor one
faction of evolutionary theory
that associates
this selection against aggression
and away from hierarchical behaviors
with the same
evolutionary processes
that produced our capacities
for cognition
evolution away from aggression
is evolution towards
the cognitive complexity
that we currently possess
and
we are the best place
the place where I laid out the most
the most extensive
case for this idea
of you know developmental
delay the developmental
biology of aggression and social cognition
underlying
human evolution is
episode three of this podcast
well kind of like episode
two and three
but you know just to like
briefly reiterate because it's a
I gotta strike a balance here
because it's a really core theme of this
podcast and I'm gonna come back
I've been diving very deep
into that biology
and we're gonna do some really interesting episodes
about rapid evolution
in the future
but
I gotta kind of strike a balance between
I don't know like
substantiating
like talking about that type of biology
a little bit when I bring it up
but without recapitulating
the entirety of the explanation
so
I'll just say like very briefly
the hypothesis is
this is also called the self-domestication
syndrome which I think is like
maybe not the greatest terminology
but the hypothesis is
that selection against
aggression
operates on developmental processes
and
these developmental processes
end up being delayed
and what that achieves
is a juvenile like
level of aggression
but then it also retains
that period of
behavioral plasticity that is associated
with early ontogenetic
stages in so many
animals and
the capacities
for social interaction
social tolerance
and communication
that are characteristic of
the early developmental stages
of so many animals and so that
you know for instance in dogs
versus wolves you get
a juvenileized appearance
a juvenile like level
of aggression but also
all of these really interesting
social cognitive abilities
that you don't find in wolves
to for instance
make inferences about
what somebody is thinking about
or trying to communicate based on where
they're looking or pointing
and that this is a distinction
that's shared for instance
by
bonobos with respect
to chimpanzees
or by experimentally domesticated
foxes with
respect to their wild
counterparts so
there's this idea that there's this like
pretty broad set of co-varying traits
where behavioral plasticity
cognitive ability
and in particular social cognitive ability
and diminished aggression
all kind of come along
for the ride with one another
under
selective pressure for any one
of those things
and the idea that humans
are shaped by neotony
by developmental delay
has been kicking around for
I don't know like a century or so
for a long time
but it keeps finding more
and more validation
in for instance brain gene
expression studies that show
that the human brain
has a gene
expression profile that is
like that of a juvenile
chimpanzee
the same
to the extent that we share the same brain genes
in our actual nuclear
DNA
which of those genes are being expressed
and at what level
is like a juvenile chimpanzee
in humans
in other examinations
of our developmental genetics
we're finding validation
of the neotony hypothesis
in particular
in neural crest cell
activity which we're going to get into
in a few episodes
so
that's the self-domestication hypothesis
or the neotony hypothesis
of human evolution
and the thing obviously
that I'm pointing out about it in this episode
is that it came
about through political
struggle
it came about through conscious choices
an active agency
that were employed by individuals
to live one way
as opposed to another
and you know that it came about
through these two processes
we've been talking about
the one of fissioning
of just walking away from a hierarchy
and
you know engaging in a little
ethnogenesis
or a little political revolution
the two things are synonymous
and through this other process
of just changing
which is also a process of ethnogenesis
and political revolution
as synonymous phenomena
a process of standing
and fighting and changing the culture
that one inhabits
so what I've decided to do
when I bring up
because in a way
I don't know
I could frame what this podcast
ultimately is in a bunch of different ways
but one of the fundamental things
it is is an examination of politics
through the lens of this type of biology
so one of the ways that I'm choosing
to strike this balance between
like kind of assuming that people
heard me the first seven times
that I brought it up
but also continuing to like enrich
our understanding
and to be rigorous and like invoke
you know some justifications
for these statements that
developmental delay
is central to human evolution
and to politics
is to just like
throw in new papers
and new pieces of evidence
around
the neoteny hypothesis
with respect to human evolution
and so I wanted to bring up
I thought that this was pretty fascinating
because
it relates to
the evolutionary developmental path
we took to become human
but it also relates to how
that
same biology produces
a range of temperaments
within individuals, within a species
and that that how you know
how that shapes politics
okay and so there's this paper
published in 2011
in developmental science
called observant
non-aggressive temperament
predicts theory of mind development
theory of mind is
you know the extent to which one
possesses a notion of what other people
are thinking or experiencing
central
to so much human social cognitive
ability but also
something that varies considerably
within individual people
but so
they were the authors of this
paper were intrigued by
this set of
differences that had been observed
between temperament
and you know with respect to like
aggression and fear
and the ability to
read social cues
and communicate
within other species like
foxes and dogs
and what not and they wanted to see
if they could map that
to temperamental variations in humans
so they wanted to see
if they studied the temperament
of humans
at a really early age
if they could predict something
about based on like their level of
emotional reactivity
about their ability
to understand
what's happening in other people's minds
later on in life
if that temperament was related
to people's social cognitive
ability later in life
and so they're talking about
social cognitive abilities in other
species and they say
these skills resemble in several ways
those of human infants
who actively read points
gestures and eye gazes
engage in communicative interactions
and otherwise actively share
intentional meanings with others
by their first birthdays
these skills contrast with the
inabilities of wolves
and chimpanzees on similar tasks
chimpanzees
prove capable of reading others' intentions
and attentional reference
in situations of competition
over food and resources
but are poorer in comparison to dogs
let alone humans
in cooperative communicative
situations
in several recent papers
Herr and Tomasello
argue that the human-like
communicative skills of dogs
resembling the initial theory
of mind capacities of human infants
represents a case
of convergent evolution
traceable to the domestication
of dogs in their long history
within human communities
specifically, they propose
a social-emotional
reactivity-temperment hypothesis
whereby wild canines
that were less fearful of
and non-aggressive toward humans
were selected
by domestication processes
over generations
a product of that process
was dog's
social communicative capacities
of a more human-like sort
and so
they came up with some
metrics for temperament
and they came up with some metrics for theory of mind
or actually they didn't
they utilized some existing metrics
of temperament and theory of mind
and did statistical analysis
on the relationship between the two
and as they say
early childhood temperament factors
clearly predict
children's later more advanced
theory of mind
for typically developing children
the vast majority will achieve
our focal theory of mind
milestone
robust explicit understanding
of how actions stem from beliefs
and false beliefs
by the time they are 6 years old or so
so more specifically
we have demonstrated that certain early childhood
temperament factors predict
whether children are quicker
or slower to come to such
theory of mind understandings
the specific temperament
factors empirically linked
to theory of mind largely
reflect social emotional
reactivity
and then Brian Hare and Vanessa Woods
also talk about this in their books
survival of the friendliest
understanding our origins and rediscovering
our common humanity
and uh
they talk about the paper that I just
read from
but then you know discussing this
relationship between temperament and
theory of mind they say
further support for this connection comes
from the tentative brain map of the
regions activated when we use
theory of mind
the medial prefrontal cortex
temporal parietal junction
superior temporal sulcus
and precuneus
there is evidence that activity in these
brain regions is either dampened
or enhanced by emotional
reactivity
uggdala is also connected to the
brain's theory of mind network
and plays a role in regulating our
response to others
and so then they talk about some other
studies where
they measured emotional reactivity
um
by uh
physiological responses to sudden
blasts of air and looking at
disturbing photos and things like that
and then they played
uh you know subsequently played
an experimental game
where women were
making decisions about how to
punish other women in some
situation or another but the point
is whatever the experimental setup
I can't recall the details
um people who showed more reactivity
who tended to startles
more strongly
in response to a sudden blast of air
or show more activation
in like
brain regions associated with an
emotional response when showed
horrifying imagery
tended to show less
activation
in their theory of mind
networks when they were
engaging in social cognition
when they were playing this experimental
game where they got to meet
out punishments and decide on the
nature of punishments
so uh you know
well in the in the rousing
conclusion to this episode
we like hammer on this one more
time and develop
what I think is quite a beautiful
and uh
important thesis about the nature of
egalitarian political struggle but
yeah I wanted in this episode
to really
focus on that particular
aspect of this overall
biology linked to
aggression and hierarchy and therefore
politics that we keep talking about
which is that that
relationship between
opposition to hierarchy
and diminished aggression
and emotional reactivity
and enhanced cognition
enhanced social cognition
and enhanced awareness
of the of the world around
one um
but before we get to that rousing
conclusion I do want to add
one more dimension to
our analysis which will
help us set up our next
episode wherein we're going
to talk a lot about in the next episode
I'm going to go through
all the evidence for
just like social complexity
and for a good deal of variation
in social form
occurring throughout the long
sweep of both human evolution
and the
and you know the ancestral experience
of cognitively and anatomically
modern humans the time
that we lived as hunter-gatherers
that is used as
kind of like a canvas for
painting whatever picture
is necessary
for one's politics
um you know but I'm going to
talk a lot about how
there's a lot of variation but also how
in the discussions that
we have about this and in the kind
of like morality tales that
we tell where ultimately
what we're really saying
when we characterize our hunter-gatherer
past is that humans
are good or that humans are bad
or that humans cooperate
or that humans compete
or that we're aggressive
or that we're peaceful
in all those cases we're so
often clustering traits
in ways that aren't
quite coherent or where they
don't inevitably cluster
we're not really acknowledging
um how
modular and how
like final level
these sort of broad tendencies
can be broken down
and can vary from one another
um so
I want to
set us up to do that by saying
like yes there has been
this long-term process whereby
there has clearly been
selection against aggression
of some kind and
selection away from
certain types of hierarchy
of human species and this is evident
in everything from
you know our diminished
canines to
our loss of
difference in size between sexes
to
the way our faces are shaped
and you know like I said
our brain gene expression patterns
and all this other stuff
but that we shouldn't get too lost
in
a schismatic binary
morality tale
where what we're saying is that
humans have just been getting
you know I'm just going to go ahead
and say like nicer in every
way that we can imagine
or whatever
and I wanted to bring in
I thought that because it is so often
the case that aggression
is treated as a monolithic
um
a monolithic
reality in a lot of these
you know so there's like
a lot of these discussions reduced to
how aggressive are humans
or are humans innately
aggressive or are we not aggressive
or whatever
should we blame all our aggression
on technology
or is technology actually diminishing
our aggression and were we
horrible brutes when we were hunter
gatherers or you know
like hunter horticulturalists
or whatever
I wanted to bring in this
notion that in biology
there's actually more than one type of aggression
and that we might
vary in one respect
of aggression
but not in another from
say a chimpanzee like ancestor
so
I recently read this paper called
Two Types of Aggression in Human Evolution
by the always interesting Richard
Rangham
and one of the things that he did
a lot was really fun was that
that debate you know like
how terrible or beautiful
are humans and what was
humanity like before recent history
is often called the
Hobbes-Rousseau debate
um but he adds
a dimension to it he says
two opposed positions predominate
before Darwin they are often
considered to have been represented by
the contrasting stances
of Jean Jacques Rousseau
Hobbes and afterward
by those of evolutionists
Peter Kropotkin
and Thomas Henry Huxley
so I like that there's the
Rousseau-Kropotkin paradigm
and then there's the Hobbes-Huxley
paradigm right so if you want
next time you're having a political
argument and somebody's just going
full terminology assault
on you and you know
you're getting into some Hobbes-Rousseau
territory just throw
the hyphenated version of the
debate at them just be like
oh well you're clearly in the
Rousseau-Kropotkin paradigm
but I have some things to say about that
you'll blow their mind
but so anyway he says
in this paper I argue
that the two opposed perspectives
are both inadequate because they
suffer from the same problem
they wrongly treat aggression as a
single behavioral category
their implication that aggression
is unimodal forces an erroneous
choice because it requires
the human propensity for aggression
to be either low
as per Rousseau-Kropotkin
or high as per Hobbes-Huxley
however researchers
in sciences other than
evolutionary anthropology have
long claimed that aggression falls
into two types here called
proactive and reactive
the classification of aggression
as bimodal is well supported
by psychological and biological
data it solves the
traditional debate by seeing
the human species as having a
low propensity for reactive
aggression and a high
propensity for proactive aggression
and this is where
you know we're going to really substantiate
that claim that it's not
like we can place chimps
bonobos in humans
on some unimodal
continuum and that chimps
are the most aggressive and hierarchical
and blah blah blah
and humans are somewhere in between
and bonobos are all the way
onto the other side
you know that there's actually
we actually just took different
paths in really interesting and
meaningful ways
but okay so he sets us up
to understand proactive
versus reactive aggression
in biological terms
he says neural studies
of aggression began during the
mid 20th century
cats whose hypothalamus was
stimulated in different locations
were found to produce different behaviors
electrodes placed in
the lateral hypothalamus
elicited a quiet
biting attack whereas
those placed more medially
led to affective
defensive behavior the distinction
led to a detailed understanding
of underlying neural
pathways since quiet
biting attacks by cats were feeding
behaviors directed in these
experiments towards laboratory rats
the two behaviors were not initially
regarded as challenging
a unimodal concept of aggression
in studies of rodents a similar
conceptual separation was at first
assumed between feeding
attacks and inter male
aggression however
in 2010 to log the
at all showed that feeding attacks
on prey were innervated in
similar ways to proactive aggression
on cons specifics
they used male laboratory
rats to compare feeding attacks
on mice and cockroaches
with proactive aggression toward
other males proactive
aggression was characterized
by low physiological
arousal a lack
of social communication and
targeting of vulnerable body
parts by contrast
reactive aggression was
associated with high physiological
arousal and communication
of intent including threats
the two types of rat
aggression thus conformed
to the human distinction
and then he says the results
of to log the at all
indicate the existence of two different
pathways in a key neural
circuit underlying aggression
they thereby conform to much
other evidence of differential
intervention for the two types
of aggression in humans
although the neural basis of human
proactive aggression
is not well understood
the critical result is that it is
different from reactive aggression
thus according to the well
supported serotonin deficiency
hypothesis reactive
aggression is suppressed by high
concentrations of brain serotonin
disruption of serotonergic
projections to the
prefrontal or interior
cingulate cortex accordingly
enhances reactive aggression
whereas serotonin selective
reuptake inhibitors and other
agents that elevate serotonin
levels can contribute to control
of reactive aggression in
both humans and non-human
models okay so
to kind of summarize that
well and to reference parts of the paper
that I didn't read predatory
behavior and proactive
aggression seemed to share
a kind of like biological basis
or a distinct neural pathway
involving different portions
of the amygdala and other
brain regions associated with aggression
and this aggression
could be basically described
as like calculated or purposeful
and then there's this other
kind of aggression that involves
more emotional reactivity
and more threat displays
and has a little bit
less of an aspect of conscious
deliberation and
is the type of aggression
crucially that constrains
social
cohesion
and cooperation
and communication
in species like chimpanzees
it's their reactive
affective
uncalculated aggression
that keeps them from
achieving
cooperative tasks that
bonobos can
so
he says that
chimpanzees express proactive aggression
when coalitions of males
travel to the border areas
of their community territories
without feeding
and make surprise attacks on
members of neighboring social communities
the frequency of this behavior
varies depending on factors
such as the number of males
in the community
and the population density
but overall it results in significant death rates
higher than those reported
in intergroup aggression
among any other nonhuman primates
in most of which
such behavior is unknown
humans are the only
other primate species
in which similarly high
or higher rates of death
have been recorded
in intergroup aggression
these are the border patrols of chimpanzees
famous for their
eeriness because of
really like precisely these
qualities that we're describing
how
calculated and emotionless
and purposeful
it all seems right you know
when they like sneak up
single file into neighboring
territory to just like
take out a chimpanzee
from the neighboring group
but then he says
reactive aggression presents a different distribution
because
unlike chimpanzees and unlike humans
bonobos don't exhibit
this really intense
like cold calculated
gangster ass
fucking form of
aggression of proactive aggression
but he says
reactive aggression presents
a different distribution
in this case chimpanzees
and bonobos both show more
aggression than humans
in chimpanzees
reactive aggression is routinely
expressed in dyadic fights
prompted by spontaneous competition
over mates, food, or dominant
status and then he says
in comparison with both
chimpanzees and bonobos
frequencies of fighting
in small scale human societies
are very low
for example Hill in
Rotado reported that in 17 years
of working with the aque
foragers of Paraguay
they never observed a scuffle
at the opposite extreme
a study of Australian aborigines
in difficult circumstances
due to poverty and alcohol
revealed an unusually high rate of physical
aggression however
compared with pan
even this supposedly high rate was trivial
pan the genus of
chimpanzees and bonobos
ok and then he says
in accord with Rousseau Kropotkin
human emotional reactivity
is clearly strongly influenced by
biology for example
an increased risk for reactive
aggression such as in patients
with intermittent explosive disorder
is associated with elevated
amygdala responsiveness
and or decreased prefrontal cortex
activity compared with
our closest relatives such
mechanisms are clearly set
a relatively unresponsive
level in humans thus
although humans show cultural
variation in the frequency of
reactive aggression the rate
of fighting is always
lower than among chimpanzees
and bonobos furthermore
fossil evidence from
human crania during the last
200,000 years shows
a reduction in anatomical
features associated with aggression
these points suggest that
the unusually low human propensity
for reactive aggression
results at least partly
from an evolved down regulation
that occurred in the second
half of the Pleistocene
so that would be
the set of evolutionary
changes we're talking about
the developmental delay
resulting in both enhanced
social cognition and
diminished aggression
but crucially it's
one dimension of aggression
and we don't have to think of
aggression as unimodal
itself or as
inextricably and tightly
correlated with everything else
that we might find like
some kind of major sort of
moral implication to
in the human experience that
it's not inevitably
inexorably axiomatically
related to say
the degree of hierarchy
separation or competition
or prosociality or whatever else
and then he relates
this bimodal
conception of aggression
with humans exhibiting
a high propensity
for proactive aggression
and relatively low propensity
for reactive aggression
to that type of anthropology
that we keep coming back to
where societies have
these coalitionary
mechanisms to prevent
any one person from taking
too much power
or you know maybe we could
say like you know we can
relate that back also to my statement
that
the assessments, the experience
of intergroup threat
would tend in other species
and in our own
to be the most predictive factor
in determining how much
individuals within a society
acquiesce to hierarchy
and that sense of threat
that sense of that
that thing we see chimpanzees
do in videos where
they hear the voices of their neighbors
and they run to the alpha male
and cling to them for comfort
is very much
a function of reactive
aggression, right?
It's like the kind of emotional reactivity
that has been down
regulated throughout the course
of human evolution
but that proactive aggression
is actually necessary
it has to be present
within our species
for us to exhibit these leveling mechanisms
where
coalitions get together and just kill somebody
for instance who's trying to take
too much power in their society
so Rangham says
proactive aggression occurs
within groups also
both in humans and chimpanzees
examples include
capital punishment
and homicide in humans
and coalition aggression and infanticide
in chimpanzees
whether selection first favor
to propensity for proactive aggression
in within group or between group
context is unknown
humans low propensity
for reactive aggression
requires entirely different kinds
of explanation
reduced reactive aggressiveness
allied to high tolerance
and extensive cooperation
explanations for reduced aggressiveness
are therefore
allied to ideas for the evolution
of within group tolerance
such as individual selection
for cooperative breeding
group selection for parochial
altruism and cultural
group selection for pro-social
norms. Okay so again
getting past
schismatic binary morality
details about humans being
good or bad or pro-social
or antisocial or whatever
there's a certain type of
aggression that is down-regulated
within the human species
that promotes in-group cohesion
but it doesn't say too much
about how
groups are going to treat
one another right
so this just gets into this whole thing
where the same biology
as we've discussed before
so it's like oxytocin atrocities
that creates the capacity
for intense human cohesion
and intense
intergroup bonding
and like some of the emotions
and experiences that
we find the most compelling
and elevated is the same
biology that allows us to do
horrible things to people as
we perceive as belonging to other
groups and so
you know Rangham says
in the case of Bonobos
talking about this paper that I just cited
not too long ago
a reduction in the propensity for male
reactive aggression compared with chimpanzees
is proposed to have resulted
from an ecology that permitted
the evolution of relatively stable
female subgroups
these led to strong female
coalitions that were able
to control aggressive males
there is no indication
of any equivalent dynamic
so again not thinking
of us as all existing
on one unimodal continuum
with Bonobos at one end
chimps at the other
and humans in between
and he says
the explanation that most explicitly
addresses why domineering
human males with high
individual fighting ability
would not have achieved high reproductive
success is the theory of
coordinated punishment by other males
in non-human primates
high male rank comes
from the ability to win fights
and the highest ranking males
tend to have high fitness
by contrast in nomadic
hunter-gatherers the closest
equivalent to high male rank in non
human primates is high
respect coming from
prestige alliance
formation and negotiation ability
the problem for
individual hunter-gatherers
who attempt to use fighting prowess
to achieve their goals
is that they are vulnerable to the actions
of male coalitions
who can jointly intimidate, expel
or kill
the offending individual
this system of control
called the reverse dominance hierarchy
or counter-dominance hierarchy
is universal in nomadic hunter-gatherers
including the gerontocratic
and polygonist societies
of northern Australia
the potency of socio-political
leveling mechanisms in hunter-gatherers
inspired Bohm's proposal
that social control was responsible
for the evolutionary
reduction of aggression
according to Bohm's execution
hypothesis
communally approved killings of group
members emerged in the place to seen
as a cultural adaptation
for suppressing domineering
bullies and norm violators
killings were facilitated
by the evolution of shared
intentionality
and possibly by weapons
the evolution of a reduced
propensity for reactive aggressiveness
followed as an incidental
genetic consequence
and then
this is the last passage from this paper
that I'll read
however to date the execution hypothesis
has treated aggression unimotally
which is problematic
the hypothesis argues that a propensity
for aggression became downregulated
as a result of aggressors being killed
by capital punishment
yet those who carried out
the killings were by definition
exhibiting a high level of aggression
fitness benefits
that the killers received by executing
aggressive victims would
undermine selection against aggression
the bimodal
view of aggression readily
solves the problem
ok so
I am getting the impression that
I've recorded an awfully long
podcast here and that I should
probably make a pretty
earnest effort to wrap it
the fuck up
but I hope that this
has been
has been useful
in some sense in clarifying
some of
these terms around
monolithic terms that we so often
traffic in
about human potentials with respect
to aggression and what not
and also
in
just like perceiving some
unity
between the political struggles we
observe in other species
and that characterize the course
of our evolution
and what we're doing today
and really like as much as I might have
sounded a little bit
about it when I brought it up initially
this idea of actually
placing what we're doing
in the context of
a tradition of millions
of years of political
struggle
slash evolution
as really kind of the same
thing
this is maybe a sense in which
I think that in this podcast
I started
with
claims to the effect that
biology pervades politics
right that what's happening
when we see people doing politics
involves a whole lot of
evolved behaviors
and unarticulated
perceptual dispositions and what not
but that at this point
I want to
make the converse claim
that politics pervades
biology that the course
of evolution has been shaped by
a political struggle
that politics and evolution
are one
and this I would hope gives a
some sense of a spiritual mandate
as we you know because
seriously if you if you look at
if you look at like the last
150 years or something
maybe even like the last couple millennia
it's easy to get real depressed
it's easy to feel like the bad guys
just always win
but if you look at millions of years
of struggle you got to say
that the egalitarian tendency
is coming out on top
in many significant respects
in the course of the human experience
and then as far as
like the future
of humanity is concerned
I think this is also
I think that this
framework is an intervention
into that sense that some people
have that for their politics
to manifest humanity
would simply have to evolve
where it places it
in this context that notion
in this context where
one can say well that actually
might be true but that's a good
reason to continue
to engage in political struggle
like if what you're trying to do
is shape human evolution
you're gonna have to do some politics
and yeah to give
us like a sense in these
times when things
are so overwhelmingly bleak
to give us some
sense of
a tradition that we can
inhabit that has
a lot of momentum and power
on its side right to
have some sense that our
ancestors were beautiful and
strong and that the reason that
we are as we are
the reason that we have the
neural architecture for you to
understand the words that I'm
writing right now and the
neural architecture for
us to encode those
words into a digital signal
that gets transmitted all over the
world and all the rest that
we are as we are
because our ancestors
fought against hierarchies
to infuse
the egalitarian
political tradition
with a sense of
being a manifestation
of a truly fundamental
enduring evolutionary
tendency and then
finally to
associate as I tried
to do more strongly in this episode
than I have in the past
the egalitarian political
tendency with
cognitive
ability and awareness
and consciousness in general
with the notion that the fight
against hierarchy is
a fight for comprehension
it is a fight for
fearlessness which allows
us to cognitively develop
in such a way that we can
begin to comprehend the
universe and ourselves
so there's all that
epic grandiosity for you
and
next time I'm going to
continue to talk about
the non-monolithic
nature of
all of these concepts which
get so densely aggregated
like hierarchy and aggression
and egalitarianism and
processiality and instead
of talking about
the political struggles that
characterize the experience of
our distant relatives
or of species evolving in
parallel to us we'll talk
about the political struggles that
happened throughout the sweep
of human
like cognitively and anatomically
modern humanity
our hunter-gatherer ancestors
and
we'll continue to try to
create a more refined
sense of the relationship
between technology
and hierarchy and then
we will set ourselves up
in the fourth part of this series
to talk about
how to get free now
how to create egalitarian
social structures
in a world where technology
gives individuals the capabilities
that it does
so until that time friends
thank you so much for listening
and we will talk again soon