Title: Nature Nurture Death Spiral pt 2 the Universal People
Episode #: 9
Episode ID: 4946894
Source: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/4946894-nature-nurture-death-spiral-pt-2-the-universal-people.mp3
------------------------------------------------------------

=== EPISODE METADATA ===
Generated: 2026-01-12 01:02:07
Episode ID: 8950975
MP3 File: 8950975-addiction-madness-despair-pt-3-despair.mp3
Title: Addiction, Madness, Despair pt. 3: Despair
Podcast/Artist: Against the Internet
Album/Series: Fight Like An Animal
Source URL: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/8950975-addiction-madness-despair-pt-3-despair.mp3
========================
The scientific evidence is stronger than ever.
Human influence on the climate system is clear.
Recent anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse gases are the highest levels in history.
Climate change has caused widespread and profound impacts on human and natural systems.
We have to act quickly and decisively if we want to avoid increasingly destructive outcomes.
But we do need the means to limit climate change and build a better future.
Friends, I'm Arnold Schroeder and this is Fight Like an Animal.
You can find the bibliography for this episode at againsttheinternet.com
and if you want to intensify the dysphoric spiral of your relationship with technology a little further, please find me on Twitter.
If you want to support this show materially, check out patreon.com slash biological singularity.
Seems now more certain than ever that the bloody experience of Vietnam is to end in a stalemate.
But it is increasingly clear to this reporter that the only rational way out then will be to negotiate, not as victors,
but as an honorable people who lived up to their pledge to defend democracy.
On February 27th, 1968, Walter Cronkite gave a broadcast editorial on CBS Evening News
where he said that he didn't think the Vietnam War was winnable.
And I guess at the time it was a really big deal.
The story was related to me by somebody when I was a kid, maybe like a schoolteacher or somebody.
But I remember, I looked it up for this podcast.
I looked up Walter Cronkite's broadcast and in this epoch of constant commentary as news or whatever,
it doesn't hit quite the same way that it was described to me as hitting by whoever it was who told me the story when I was a kid.
But the way that it was related to me when I was a kid fascinated me
and I thought about it ever since as the way that I thought that it happened
or my understanding of the situation was that he kind of broke down on air,
that he was trying to present the united front of all the respectable opinion makers
and the business world and the government on Vietnam and that he cracked
and he was like, I can't do this. I have to acknowledge that this is horribly immoral and hopeless and terrible or whatever.
And I always thought about this in relation to other social and ecological conditions
and imagined these points that would come when the very serious people
who we see telling us that things are basically fine on things like evening news shows
just kind of break down and acknowledge that they don't know what's happening
and that it seems really bad and that they've been lying or whatever.
I've wondered for a long time when people would start having their Walter Cronkite moments
only now that I've actually watched this broadcast to Walter Cronkites
it's not really a Walter Cronkite moment that I'm looking for,
but I am looking for a moment like that.
I'm looking for this moment when the professionals,
when the people who are thus far managing to maintain their composure
in the face of the apocalypse just kind of fucking crack.
I don't know if it's coming or not,
but it's really just such a dream-like existence, this apocalypse of ours,
to be seeing such unequivocal, overwhelming, emotionally, utterly disorienting indications of collapse all around us,
but to also just be inhabiting this society that's engaged in this incessant dream-like babble about a bunch of other shit
and to encounter the same sort of like tropes and themes and forms of dialogue about the ecological crisis
in its current stage as you could have heard in like the fucking 90s.
In a manner that policymakers can understand the science,
it provides a roadmap on the basis of which policymakers can take action
and deal with the challenge of climate change.
And that's the case whether we're talking about broadcast news
or honestly whether we're talking about scientists who talk about climate change,
like seeing them continue to make appeals to the same,
what I would characterize as like very unscientific appeals to the same exceptionally hypothetical processes
whereby the public and policymakers are going to integrate the findings that they've been producing
and act on them, like seeing scientists resort to these themes year in and year out
as the planet collapses around us is wildly disorienting.
So the Addiction Madness Despair series was supposed to be narratively framed
around why I didn't make a podcast for a couple of months,
which at this point feels sort of ridiculous because I've just been sitting around earnestly working on podcasts for like a month straight.
But I guess I kind of felt even though I'm not really trying to like,
you know, I'm not trying to diminish the apocalyptic situation that we're in at all, right?
So I don't bear that burden of like the broadcast news anchor,
but I am trying to rationally engage it and be productively focused on ways to achieve better rather than worse outcomes,
even if all the outcomes are pretty intense and pretty dark, you know,
but like a difference between say the continuation of some living things or not, you know,
like these kind of distinctions still really matter to me.
And it's not clear to me that we don't have any agency in determining them.
I really found myself uncertain if I could rationally engage the situation,
or if I could find the motivation or the conviction to keep assessing these variables
and trying to find ways to intervene.
And, you know, I mean, things just felt pretty fucking when it got so hot.
That's what did it for me, not the heat dome hot, not the, not the like 120 degree whatever here in Portland.
I think we got up to 116 degrees, not that, but the very early spring that we had that was just brilliantly sunny and way,
way hotter than it should have been, which to me was a decisive indication that the summer would have temperatures like it's had.
So I've, you know, when it got so hot, I freaked at the fuck out.
I completely lost my fucking mind.
And I found myself in this really paradoxical situation where on the one hand I wanted to keep making this podcast about ecological collapse
and the underlying, you know, biology of the behavior that shapes the social and political systems that are causing ecological collapse
and all this stuff.
And at the same time, I felt like I was imposing a set of constraints on myself that were analogous to what other people in our society are doing
who are pretending like this isn't happening.
Like I continually felt I was in this feedback loop where I couldn't work because I felt like I was trying to get past or dismiss
some fundamental skepticism that I had about what I was doing in order to like present, you know, this kind of like functional,
professional, engaged, whatever, like version of myself and to continue my work.
And I really, I found that there was just this tremendous resistance.
There was, you know, this part of me that was like, no, I have to, you know, I have to confront this darkness.
If what I'm doing is supposedly trying to help like be a guide for people on our journey through this darkness
and like look for paths to the motherfucking light, like I can't pretend like the darkness isn't there.
And you know, it's just like this weird internal dialogue that went on and on.
And so at a certain point, I just stopped podcasting and I just kind of let myself break and I let myself just really feel the true extent
of the despair that I was experiencing.
And for a while that just seemed like what life was.
That just seemed like my new identity.
And so as I wandered Portland, Oregon, high out of my mind, sobbing in the noonday sun,
the dreamlike dialogues around climate, the fucking incessant babble just continued.
Right. And my favorite is when policymakers and scientists say that the evidence for climate change is unequivocal.
There can no longer be any doubt that climate change is real.
Like they're being eminently rational.
Like they've navigated all these variables that the rest of us are too fucking stupid to follow them on the journey through.
And they came to this brilliant conclusion that they're now patiently explaining to everybody.
Like we can't see that Siberia is on fire and that the western red cedars of Portland, Oregon have been scorched by the sun.
Warming of the climate system is unequivocal.
Since the 1950s, many of the observed changes are unprecedented over decades to millennia.
The atmosphere and ocean are warmer. The amounts of snow and ice have diminished and sea level has risen.
Even in the world of climate science, even among progressive policymakers, even among the people who traffic in dialogues about dire peril and rapid mobilizations and all the rest,
there's just really this overwhelming sense that I have that the mental models that we inhabit about climate are still in the sort of social consensus that has accrued around them
is a more potent stimulus for more people and more of the time than the empirical reality of the burning world.
And so when I say that I myself was having a Walter Cronkite moment and that I just kind of am always wondering when all of these people are going to have their Walter Cronkite moments
or what I thought was a Walter Cronkite moment from the time I was a child based on something somebody told me that I never critically examined,
I guess what I'm saying is that I think living in this untruth must be painful and that it does seem like social consensus seems utterly unassailable until precisely the moment that it's completely breaking down.
You know, which seems to be so characteristic of so many times that there's major social rupture, it's like the system seems impervious to any kind of change until the very moment that it's just completely crumbling.
And that process seems to involve a lot of people who are in positions of power within a given system kind of all fairly spontaneously and collectively deciding that they just don't want to endure the falsehoods that they're required to traffic and to maintain that system of power.
Right, like I don't know, I mean the first two examples that hit me really hard in my life were watching the religious cult that I grew up in fall apart, watching somebody's power go from like fairly absolute to non-existent in this weird kind of like very decisive rapid phase of transition
and then watching the Soviet Union collapse and seeing all of the people which happened like a couple years later and watching all of the people who had kind of like maintained that system in some way sort of collectively decide to defect in some way or another.
You know, like this really interesting process, which also just seems to characterize the collapse of systems of power in general. So yeah, I'm waiting for it. I'm waiting for the time that there doesn't feel like a massive disconnect between what we can just literally look out our windows and see happening in the world.
And the way that the professionals and the very serious people and the people with respectable opinions talk about this stuff, like waiting for that moment where they stop using these bizarre, obscure metrics that actually just make it kind of sound like what's happening isn't that big of a deal.
Yeah, I took, I went through a day's worth of climate headlines as they appeared in my fucking Twitter feed and clicked on all of them just to give you a sample of like exactly what I mean, these like strange, so here's from Vice.
Climate projections for the state of Mississippi look bleak. Temperatures currently exceed dangerous levels on an average of 25 days each year in the state. A figure that's expected to quadruple by 2050, right? So that's how bad it's going to get is there's going to be not 25 but 100 days where it's a little too hot to be outside some of the time by 2050.
To me is just like a wildly optimistic, a wildly optimistic estimate that requires not looking at the interactions of all the sub components of the global system and seeing how they're all feeding back on themselves and how they're creating much, much bigger problems than that.
Here's from the technology review. Fire risk, defined as the chance that an area will experience a moderate to high severity fire in any given year, could quadruple across the US by 2090, even under scenarios where emissions decline significantly in the coming decades according to a recent study.
So again, it's like we're all going to be here in 2090, there's still going to be agriculture and oxygen in the atmosphere, right? But the fire risk might quadruple.
Here's from the Guardian. The new computing modeling study instead looked for the first time at the highest margin by which week long heat wave records could be broken in the future.
It found that heat waves that smash previous records by roughly five degrees Celsius would become two to seven times more likely in the next decades and three to 21 times more likely from 2051 to 2080 unless carbon emissions are immediately slashed.
Such extreme heat waves are all but impossible without global heating. Again, we're all still here. There's still a food chain, right? The basic like biophysical predicates of our existence and that of all other species are still around, but you know, there's just like way more heat waves than there used to be.
And I guess it just, it really does seem to me, for all the sophistication of a lot of this modeling and whatever, and I'm not trying to diminish its sophistication, like I understand that it involves technical prowess that I don't necessarily possess.
And you know, like it's complex and interesting and beautiful in a certain regard, the way that these models function. But it does seem like they tend to give people this sort of like very limited perspective that they tend.
I mean, you know, it's like broadly a problem in science and in specialization of any kind is, you know, like it does tend to like inhabiting the minutiae of these modeling processes does seem to kind of render people a little not great at looking at the systemic interactions of all these other sub components.
So it's like, you know, we isolate these variables to such a degree that we're imagining a future in which, you know, fucking heat waves have quadrupled or the risk of wildfire has sextupled or whatever.
And we're not seeing how that and a whole bunch of other processes all being like way outside of historical bounds creates like a radically different situation for, you know, like all the variables influence one another.
And the taking the more systemic view, it just basically, I guess I could reduce this to be very reductionist about the statement about systems thinking that I'm trying to make.
It does. It does seem like the more systemic of view one takes of the ecological crisis, the worst ones assessment of it becomes that that really does seem to be pretty like axiomatically fundamentally true.
And it does kind of seem like a lot of the people who are contributing to this dialogue and remaining, you know, like even if they're using even if they're like giving quotes to reporters where they say that they're terrified or whatever,
even if they're trafficking in language of like dire consequences and intergenerational catastrophe, it does seem like some people who are involved in this process on the scientific end in particular kind of just do know that things are much worse than they feel like they're allowed to say,
but that that sense of constraint is still there that we have not crossed a threshold and I don't I don't know where in the external like in terms of like external physical conditions getting bad enough like I don't know where that point is.
I'm completely confident the point doesn't exist. This is like a classic a classic trope of like climate politics is this this notion that at some point things will get so objectively bad that people will have to acknowledge the nature and severity of the crisis and I don't think that point exists.
I mean, I just don't. I think there's you know there's already people who are attributing severe weather events to nefarious machinery operated by diabolical cabals of leftists and I don't think that tendency is going to decline as conditions intensify.
But yeah, taking a systemic view has always been associated with way, way more dire predictions about our global trajectory than one typically finds in the respectable discourse.
And that probably started most notably with the limits to growth, which was published in 1972, and was based on a model called the world three model, which was created by like, you know, like one of the founders of systems theory.
And so this gets into this interesting I mean when when systems theory was kind of first being explored, you know, back when it was called chaos theory, which you should read if you if you want a great book about like this, this stage of systems theory, just definitely check out chaos by James like it's an amazing book.
But you know, these these like little collectives that were that were doing like nonlinear math and looking at at things from this new perspective embodied, you know, later became described as systems theory were kind of like hopping discipline to discipline and showing people in various disciplines, how some of their results were wrong or giving them fundamental insights.
You know, they were they were making a bunch of breakthroughs and a bunch of different disciplines because they were applying these tools were looking at all of the interactions of all the sub components of a system, which is to say like, you know, they were kind of just doing a better job in some ways of seeing the big picture.
Right. That's that's what it is. And it just it seems like that reality is is totally present in ecological science and that there's, you know, climate science and all that stuff that there there is kind of like these two camps.
And and when people look at variables into grade of isolation, they just don't really see what's going to happen with those variables.
So Limits to Growth was published in 1972 and predicted social and ecological collapse by like about mid century, if we remained on the trajectory that we were on in 1972, which we have.
And it's conclusions were like hugely derided by a great number of people. It was, you know, like mocked viciously, but their predictions seem to be more or less precisely accurate.
A paper came out in the Journal of Industrial Ecology in 2020 called Update to Limits to Growth, comparing the world three model with empirical data.
And it's described like this. In an interconnected system like our global society, a solution to one limit inevitably causes interactions with other parts of the system, giving rise to a new limit, which then becomes the binding constraint to growth.
To illustrate this point, the Limits to Growth authors created various scenarios with world three. World three was based on the work of Forester, the founder of systems dynamics, a modeling approach for interactions between objects in a system, often characterized by nonlinear behavior like delays, feedback loops and exponential growth or decline.
The Limits to Growth scenarios were thus not meant to produce point predictions, but rather to help us understand the behavior of systems in the world over time.
And so like I said, the Limits to Growth model projected social and ecological collapse by mid century, and what this paper finds is that we are just very precisely on the trajectory that the Limits to Growth described.
To me, it's the sense that the feedback loops look good and triggered, which gives climate change like a very runaway quality.
And then like the empirical reality of just like where runaway climate change has taken life in the past.
How like how close to total extinction we've gotten with past instances of climate change, of a magnitude which we appear to be, you know, at least equaling but probably exceeding pretty quickly.
And then looking at all of the other stressors that exist on living systems that never were present in the past to amplify the, you know, like the extinction potential of climate change.
And you know, and then like looking at, I mean, but like I said, like when we look at all the interactions of all of these interrelated systems of technology and the weather and everything.
I'm not even really sure it doesn't even seem to me that we're all that likely to be alive to witness the all these feedback loops play out because it just really seems like at some point.
The insane weather interacting with all of the fucking like nuclear facilities that are all over the world that are already sort of in disrepair.
You know, all those crumbling social systems and all that crumbling infrastructure interacting with all that extreme weather just seems like sooner or later is going to have a really, really, really dire outcome.
And you know, this is one of those things where it's like, I can't find that that does not seem to be in any ecological assessment being made by any like respectable entity.
It's weird. It's like being worried about a nuclear meltdown and how catastrophic that would be how that could end life on earth is like some real, it's just not in vogue, right?
It's like some real 70s shit or whatever, but it's not less of a threat. It's more of a threat because those facilities are all just like really old now or you know, like the ones that already existed in the 70s are.
And this is one of those things where it's like the literally the only person that I can find talking about this is Guy McPherson, who is a scientist who talks about the inevitability of near term human extinction and operates a website that's called onlyloveremains.org.
And you know, McPherson has spent a bunch of time documenting various feedback loops in the climate system and how they all appear to have been triggered.
From albedo to dark snow, from plankton to crypto games, from the tropics to the poles, the story is the same. We're screwed. It takes exactly one so for enforcing feedback loop to demonstrate that climate change is irreversible.
I had documented 65 such feedback loops when I stopped counting in August of 2016. Others of course appeared within the last two years.
I guess like part of my mission with this podcast is to always be asking not what people believe but why they believe it.
I do think that there's something to be said in the past. We've talked about other sort of aspects of perception and worldview that shape how people relate to ecology.
How empathy is a fundamental predictor of an ecological worldview and how seeing oneself as embedded in interconnected, feeling a fundamental unity with the world around you is actually a much more significant predictor of one's ecological perceptions
than any kind of like rational deliberation about how dire the consequences of any given like degree of collapse or aspect of collapse are going to be or whatever.
That stuff just seems to not really motivate anybody at all.
I guess one of the things that I'm kind of doing with this episode is adding a dimension to that sort of like landscape of variation in ecological perceptions,
which is the tendency, the variation in how systemic one thinks, which I do think is a variation like I just described that even exists among scientists.
You know, there just really are some people who tend to take a much broader view than others.
But there's also this just really this aspect of social consensus involved here.
And I guess Guy McPherson like myself seems to think that a lot of people who are involved in the dialogue that civilization condones about climate, who are coming from like a scientific angle,
you know, like are kind of just lying about what they really think about how bad it is.
It really does seem like there's just some kind of unspoken consensus that it's not a good idea to be explicit about one's actual perceptions.
And like I don't know like Guy McPherson just released this video where he talks about Bill Nye, the science guy doing some special where he comes and interviews Guy McPherson.
And on camera is very dismissive of McPherson's notion that human extinction is imminent and off camera tells him that he thinks it's probably going to happen sooner than Guy McPherson thinks.
You know, I don't know like which was kind of weird.
I mean like I felt a little like is that snitching, you know, but but it's but this this question is really fundamental and significant.
It's like why why is this happening?
Why is there this massive disconnect between empirical reality and the dialogue around climate change?
And why is there this weird consensus to that?
We should like traffic in these stultifying just like bizarrely disconnected metrics about, you know, quadrupling fire risk and all the rest and and like not acknowledge how dire of a situation we're in.
Like just truly why is that? Who made that decision and on what basis and at what point are people going to defect from that fucking consensus?
So that people like me can stop feeling so utterly disoriented every time that respectable discussion about climate occurs and you know can stop wandering around getting high and sobbing or whatever.
We continue to hear scientists, governments and media outlets lie about the irreversibility of climate change.
The general point I'm trying to hammer home with these videos is simple. Climate change is irreversible.
As a result humans will soon be extinct, a finding supported by abundant evidence and yet ignored by most scientists, governments and media outlets.
And yeah, I mean, don't think I freaked the fuck out but don't think that I was having my first like we're probably not going to win the great global revolution moment.
Don't think I was having my desert moment because I never, if you're not familiar, desert is a text about climate change from an anonymous anarchist author that was, you know, I guess like one of the first and most articulate voices
about the wilderness of despair. You know, just saying like I don't think we're going to win guys like we played a good game and I really love us and think we're beautiful and it's important that we tried but I think we lost.
I'll read a quote in its opening pages like the first like the first couple paragraphs.
The specter that many try not to see is a simple realization. The world will not be saved. Global anarchist revolution is not going to happen.
Global climate change is now unstoppable. We are not going to see the worldwide end to civilization, capitalism, patriarchy, authority.
It's not going to happen anytime soon. It's unlikely to happen ever. The world will not be saved, not by activists, not by mass movements, not by charities, and not by an insurgent global proletariat.
The world will not be saved. This realization hurts people. They don't want it to be true, but it probably is.
I never had to have this moment, right? I never had a desert moment because not even when I was like a 90s teenager, did I ever think that we were like on the cusp of revolution?
It feels like a lot of people around me really did believe that back then. I always thought we were fighting against terrible, terrible odds.
I mean, I thought that they were better when I was a kid than I do now. I was like, maybe there's like a 3% chance of like saving some life on Earth, you know?
And now I'm like, I would give anything for a 3% chance. But in a way, the reason that I wanted to mention desert or quote desert is because I believe...
I feel like it belongs to this very particular genre, which is like the weary movement veteran reflecting on what they've been doing for years and why, you know, like what was good about it and what was terrible about it and why it ultimately didn't work.
I don't have a more concise name for the genre, but I also feel like this podcast was kind of very much in that genre, like it's definitely desert is this text that talks about how organizing is a manic depressive cycle.
And, you know, when you're in the depressive phase is when you synthesize what you've learned and like try to like integrate it into some greater body of theory that you sort of have been formulating while you've been getting your ass kicked by the police or whatever.
And so that's that's like another way to characterize this this like phase where I sort of had to let go of productivity for a little while was that I felt like I felt like I was inhabiting that frame like, okay, I'm the weary movement veteran.
Let me reflect on, you know, on social movements from the scientific perspective and that somewhere this winter this spring this summer that kind of became unacceptable to me as like a that's like I'm very clear that's not a place that I want to permanently reside.
And I've been continually asking myself how to make what I'm doing useful and what I'm going to be doing that's useful.
And that corresponds to a bunch of really, I don't know, interesting psychological shifts that that I do want to talk about a little bit.
One of one of which is just actually that I really found myself, you know, I guess at some point, I'm not really sure how to characterize this.
I'll just I'll say it in as simple terms as possible.
I realized that, you know, like I thought that we were probably past tipping points for a really long time.
But I like decisively concluded that we were past tipping points in 2017.
And I think that from that time on, I really felt this sense of like shame or inadequacy or something like that.
With respect to the global trajectory, I really felt like I had personally done something wrong.
And recently, I really started to experience this reconfiguration of my thinking around that where I just kind of feel proud of how I've spent my life.
And like I want to keep fucking fighting, you know, and and not I took some acid this winter and like went on top of a mountain and had a vision where an eagle came out of my body.
But I definitely in the course of that really experienced this like decisive shift where, you know, I just kind of stopped feeling this like I stopped carrying this like burden of shame around that I had been carrying.
And that allowed me to just kind of like see things a lot more clearly.
And then at the same time, it actually allowed me to more critically assess my own behavior.
And I felt like I was in this loop where I was kind of like, oh, I fought so hard, and I just wasn't successful or whatever.
And then, you know, like I was kind of I kind of feel like I kind of feel like I and anybody else in the who's inhabiting the weary movement veteran genre at a certain point really does have to look at what they've actually done and been like,
really, though, is that is that actually the best game that you could have played? You know, like I feel like I feel like I have constantly been learning new things as I've gone through life, attempting to like create some kind of resistance
politics, some kind of ecological resistance politics, you know, and like if I look at any given phase of what I've been doing from the perspective of like a few years later.
I'm always kind of like, ah, that's maybe, you know, seems a little amateurish or whatever.
And when I look back on what I've actually done, when I imagine having the hypothetical conversation that is always invoked, you know, where it's like you're talking to some.
I'm not going to personally have any grandchildren, but you know, like some kind of like some folks a couple generations down the line or whatever, and they're like, what did you do?
When I think about what I've actually done, I'm like, I don't know if that really does count as like an actually concerted meaningful effort that truly invokes all of my capacities.
And you know, I'm a little like, I don't know.
I like ran around locking people to a lot of refinery gates and blockading a lot of trains and shit.
But like, is that really, is that really like the mechanism of the total transformation of the social order that you know, would be required to avert total extinction?
I don't know. I don't know if that's not really what I thought. I just thought I was trying to create some momentum.
I mean, that's the thing that that's actually such a huge difference between then and now is that I was just I was sort of like embittered about or a little skeptical of having too much theory.
And I just really wanted to generate momentum and have that be the foundation for, you know, the vast process of social transformation or whatever.
But as I look back on most of what I've done, it just really feels not revolutionary enough.
It really feels like none of it was oriented towards completely reconfiguring power at, you know, at like a global scale.
And that that is actually the only thing that one can meaningfully say is it like an attempt to avert total ecological collapse.
And so to conclude more or less to conclude this episode, I'm going to read this op-ed that I wrote, which probably repeats a few points that I already made.
But that that I wrote for no audience in particular, I violated.
I was quipping to my friend who asked me to write it that I violated either the first or the second rule of writing.
I can't remember which which is that, you know, like I don't know who my audience is because I just wasn't writing this for any particular publication or anything.
But I have this friend at the Environmental Change Institute at Oxford who is constantly having these dialogues with people in like the social movement side of climate politics
who are super hostile to any discussion of negative emissions because it's so frequently invoked as a defense of the status quo, right?
You know, it's just like it's the magic wand that motherfuckers wave to say like, oh yeah, we're going to keep blowing up mountains to like extract coal or whatever.
You know, we're going to keep fracturing fucking rocks beneath the earth to extract oil.
But it's chill because we'll just we'll take carbon dioxide out of the sky later.
You know, and I as much as that whole framework is so bewilderingly disingenuous.
There there's just actually a very real need to talk about to do more than fucking talk about removing greenhouse gases from the atmosphere.
So, you know, she asked me like she said, like, write an op-ed your credentials as somebody who doesn't want resource extraction to continue or pretty unassailable.
So I did, you know, I just kind of like wrote it out.
Maybe it'll help her and her work or whatever.
But I'm going to read it because I think it's pretty decent framing about some of these like existential questions about climate and what to do when we don't know if there's any hope at all for life on earth.
And how to frame like a process of social transformation that, you know, like a revolutionary effort that would be commensurate with the scale of the crisis that we're in.
Okay, so here it is.
When I first concluded that atmosphere greenhouse gas removals are absolutely necessary, I was preparing to call a railroad signal control room and inform them of the blockade of an oil train.
This was in the summer of 2017, the first time smoke blackened the skies over the entire North American West Coast.
This moment culminated years of full-time organizing to shut down fossil fuel infrastructure during which I vehemently rejected any discussion of negative emissions.
The reason for my conversion that day was simply that it became clear to me we are past tipping points.
Our collective survival, that of our own species and virtually or literally every other, is now contingent not only on the cessation of fossil fuel extraction but on totally uncertain measures to halt the feedback loops we have already initiated.
We are in a desperately perilous and tragically stupid situation.
How long can we say it's almost too late before we say it's too late?
How long will we say this is happening faster than we predicted before simply acknowledging it's happening exactly as fast as it is?
If climate change has any overarching lesson about ourselves to teach us, it is that the objective reality of a situation is far less significant in shaping our understanding than psychological need.
The landscape of climate perceptions is vast, but in virtually every case these perceptions map tightly to broader narratives about the nature of the world and our place in it.
The extent to which the data fit the mental schema we construct is, at best, of secondary importance.
In other words, we can characterize this landscape of perceptions in terms of degrees and varieties of denial.
Certainly, explicitly dismissing the reality of the ecological crisis amidst the towering infernos and raging storms is a particularly clumsy and overt form.
But is the faith of Western liberal democracy's most ardent opinion columnists that the existing institutions of power will inevitably address the problem any less absurd?
Are $15 a ton carbon taxes and net zero pledges without any underlying policy detail any less a wanton plunge into a world crafted by psychological need than saying this isn't happening, this isn't real?
And at a certain point in the global trajectory, don't some of the primary narratives of the climate movement also become a form of denial?
There's no truly definitive way to establish we are past tipping points or what, if anything, will survive the processes we have unleashed.
But whether someone is even capable of concluding that climate collapse has become self-perpetuating is a function of, rather than some evidentiary standard, the extent to which it is psychologically bearable and how it relates to a broader world view.
I will therefore not traffic in ecological inferences, but in a reframing of the sociopolitical implications of searching for a path to survival in greenhouse gas sequestration.
Currently, talk of negative emissions is highly predictive of a defense of the status quo and continued extraction of fossil fuels.
If you follow these dialogues at all, you probably guessed why I mentioned at the outset that I became an advocate for negative emissions while blockading an oil train.
It is to say, I could not possibly be any less motivated to defend the existing order or to justify further resource extraction.
I have spent the majority of my productive adult energies blockading roads, ports, train tracks and refineries, aiding with pipeline shutdowns, organizing tree-sits, and enduring multiple phases of surveillance and federal investigation.
Burdened by the grief of a quarter-century-long losing fight for a living world, if I could give my young self any advice, it would be to fight harder, take greater risks, and be more implacably hostile to the ascendant forms of power.
Of course, talk of negative emissions has become a default rhetorical device in the absurdist theater of institutional climate politics.
As our crisis deepens, those tidy emissions curves that plummet to net zero by, say, 2050 require more and more totally speculative carbon sequestration, and they even do so without sacrificing consumer choice.
If we want to continue to undo the conditions that make life possible for a little while longer, we can take the yellow curve and fix the damage later by waving the negative emissions wand a little harder.
If we're feeling like sobering up and accepting our godlike powers of destruction now, we can take the blue curve and rely less on sorcery and mist in shadows and currently non-existent technology.
But just like having a mustache and being vegetarian doesn't make you Hitler, the fact that some people invoke negative emissions disingenuously doesn't mean it's inherently disingenuous to do so.
In fact, it's particularly strange territory to cede to the dead-eyed technocrats managing our world into oblivion.
An acknowledgement that the existing socio-political order put us onto a trajectory toward extinction that only speculative measures can potentially take us off of is hardly an unassailable defense of that order.
To me, this is about as assailable as it gets. That our survival relies on the deployment of unproven technologies is the most decisive argument one could possibly encounter in favor of a revolution.
This revolution would necessarily consist of a fundamental shift in what the anarchist anthropologist David Graeber described as the politics of large, heavy objects.
The terrain of possibility for stabilizing global ecology is largely unexplored because that exploration requires the deployment of massive infrastructure, and such infrastructure is currently under the control of sociopaths.
Reflecting heat back to space with mirrors, destroying methane with massive arrays of photocatalytic reactors, distributing crushed silicate rock over agricultural lands to accelerate the flux of atmospheric carbon into the Earth,
the direct capture of greenhouse gases with modified cooling tower technology. All of these paradigms require things like trucks, workforces, factories.
They all require access to and control of large, heavy objects.
It's heartbreaking to imagine what would have been possible if something like the level of resources that went into figuring out how to drill horizontally to fracture underground rock formations for gas and oil had gone into figuring out a means of collective survival.
But what acknowledging we are past tipping points achieves is a decisive understanding that the people who control the large, heavy objects are not looking for a means of collective survival, and that if we want to, we have to take the large, heavy objects away from them.
Systems theory speaks of controlling variables that determine the states of many other apparently unrelated variables. In social systems, I believe the politics of large, heavy objects is one such controlling variable.
There is no way to shift these politics without fundamental revolutionary change throughout our entire society. Negative emissions should be the terrain of the destroyers, not the defenders of the status quo, and should be pursued alongside militant opposition to continued fossil fuel extraction.
I'm occasionally proud of my rhetorical devices, but I don't think this one is remarkable at all. It seems, if anything, screamingly self-evident. But what I am saying is almost entirely absent from climate discourse. Why is this the case?
I believe it is because we are living in an era where politics is, for most people most of the time, largely a venue for niche self-expression and identity affirmation more than it is the instrumental pursuit of tangible goals in the external world.
This state of affairs was predicted with uncanny precision by Ronald Engelhardt in his 1977 book The Silent Revolution, changing values among western publics. In it, he describes what he terms the post-materialist shift, the changes that began with post-World War II hyperabundance in affluent societies in a generation that was reasonably confident it would not face material scarcity.
With those aspects of the hierarchy of needs met, Engelhardt predicted generational shifts in emphasis towards self-realization and increasingly specialized modes of reasoning and expression.
He described how expanding access to education and electronic media were transforming everyone into political specialists and commentators, predicting, long before social media, our current age of discordant debate and wildly diverging epistles.
But he also described how this new hyper-participatory politics, while oppositional, would be less concerned with the instrumental pursuit of tangible goals.
He described, in other words, that uncanny mixture of serious opposition and a lack of any real strategic imperative that characterizes everything from the Paris Uprising of 1968 to the U.S. Capitol riots of 2021.
Jonathan Matthew Smucker's hegemony how-to, a roadmap for radicals, applies the post-materialist lens to the Occupy movement, so rich in momentum and so lacking in a cohesive strategy.
Climate politics, for all its deadly seriousness and non-negotiable timelines, is no exception to this trend.
Positions are crafted in the language of strategic utility, but they have an uncanny tendency to affirm unique aspects of group identity, to be exercises in niche language and reasoning.
One useful way to classify climate perceptions is in terms of the degree of opposition of one's politics.
On such a continuum, we move seamlessly from the absurdity of insisting that precisely the entities that created our crisis will begin to fix it any day now,
to the absurdity of invoking academic language about unexamined perspective and local frames of reference, the beginning of an ethnography style of politics, as a substitute for any concrete program of action in the corporeal world.
Group psychology tells us that the opinions of groups are more extreme than the average opinion of a group's individual members, and that the more sequestered a group is in its own logic, the more pronounced this tendency will be.
The process whereby people adopt positions of little utility is, like the climate system to which these positions ostensibly refer, a feedback loop.
And then, even without all the temptations to useless self-expression laying around in our hyper-technological society, there is the question of grief.
To say we are past tipping points is to attempt to psychologically integrate an inarticulably painful truth.
One anthropologist's list of a few dozen traits common to all human societies ever documented includes demonstrably false beliefs.
Even on an earth of infinite abundance and dazzling beauty, people inhabited narratives about how death isn't real and we're going somewhere even better and even more beautiful when we die.
Convincing arguments can be made that the human mind, in most cases, is not strong enough to acknowledge the realities it is capable of perceiving.
Why should the end of the world be any exception?
But of course, when painful truths are confronted, we get more out of that confrontation than pain.
We see a new terrain of possibility open up before us.
Therapists and researchers often speak of trauma as a stimulus that is too overwhelming to experience, and of healing as a phase where that stimulus, before losing its power, becomes more consuming and painful than ever before.
I am by no means saying that acknowledging the self perpetuating nature of ecological collapse means that it loses its emotional impact, but there is a thrill and a beauty to accepting the adventure of survival on its own terms.
When I look back on what I've done to halt the destruction of the world, it mostly seems pretty ridiculous and self evidently inadequate.
But what I'm proud of, and what I'm arguing for, is that I consistently adapted to new conditions, trying out new paradigms as the ecological and political situations rapidly evolved.
When I was young I believed in conservation biology and militant confrontations in national forests and federal environmental law.
When it became clear that wasn't working, that the ecological crisis was coming for protected areas, just as quickly as anywhere else, I shifted my focus to shutting down industrial infrastructure.
When it became clear we were past tipping points, I shifted my focus to a combination of restorative measures and to sciences like anthropology and psychology, in an effort to refine old political strategies and develop new ones.
Whether or not what I've done is particularly savvy on its own terms, it hasn't been static.
This metric can be applied to most climate politics with appalling results, has the agenda and the means of pursuing it changed as rapidly or dramatically as the global ecological situation or the broader political situation.
In most cases, the answer is emphatically negative. This is a guarantee of extinction. If anyone or anything is going to survive, it will be because we moved faster than what's coming.
So friends, that's my strategic frame. My strategic frame is that we should use taking control of the big heavy things that we need to see if there's a way to mitigate the damage that we've already done to this world, away from the people who currently control them.
And that that's kind of like an axiomatic pursuit that will in the process invoke all of these other variables of social and political transformation that are relevant and that we want to see.
And that this work should be engaged with kind of joyfully as a creative process of adventure into totally unknown territory, where what we get when we acknowledge the damage that we've done is we get to really be on the adventure of looking with clear eyes at what's possible to do,
which we just don't know. It actually is just so thrilling. But imagine, I guess what I think about all the time is this question from an objective purely physical perspective.
Like if social systems presented literally no constraint, if there were 8 billion people in the world and all of this technology and all this machinery, and we were literally like, let's just all devote ourselves assiduously to the problem of survival,
like what could we actually achieve? If we had the big heavy things, if we could begin to deploy some of these paradigms that currently just exist in a handful of scientific papers and a fucking scattered pilot project or two that doesn't have any real funding or whatever,
like if we could take control of the world's infrastructure and actually begin the experiment, nobody can say that they actually know what would happen.
There is no, for as much as my ecological assessment is more or less precisely convergent with Guy McPherson's, I don't think that anybody can say that if we actually started to try to see if we could undo the damage that we really know what would happen.
And so I honestly want to say that I find this to be as much as it is a time of great desperation and profound motherfucking darkness, I find this to be a thrilling time to be alive.
So yeah, I wanted to do this series to kind of chart my own course through addiction, madness, and despair, but really like despair in particular felt important to me to talk about because I wanted to, I guess, kind of present a basis for, you know, I'm asking people, as the world is ending,
I'm asking people to give me their time for me to talk about how to intervene or like how to assess it or whatever. And it might sound ridiculous for me to agonize about like whatever very limited power I have, because you know, I'm aware of its very sharp limits.
But I really do, I think about the ethical dimensions of doing that, of trying to engage people in some sort of paradigm about how to approach the fucking apocalypse that we're in.
And it feels really important to me to have had my Walter Cronkite moments, once again, the moment I thought he had when I was given this floored description by some adult whose identity I can't quite recall as a child.
You know, for as much as the professionals seem to think that maintaining composure or whatever is the sort of like fundamental criterion for credibility, and that the fact that they maintain composure is why you should listen to them.
I'm saying the opposite. I'm saying that social systems tend to, you know, tend to like inhabit greater and greater untruths precisely because people in positions of power within them are willing to maintain their fucking composure in the face of like the great falsehoods that they can see their trafficking in.
And you know, they're capable of like burying the emotional burden of living in untruth. And I think that the opposite criterion should be a basis for credibility.
I feel like the people who should be listened to are the people who have fallen apart, who have really engaged their despair and have come to some other place to have like found a promised land on the other side of that valley.
And I have. And I really wouldn't bother to be saying so if I hadn't. You know, it's not like, I mean, I really thought I was just stopping this podcast for a while, but I'm not going to because I understand what I'm trying to do and I understand how it's strategic for me to continue.
And so I really just want to thank you for listening, for giving me your time in such a desperate, cataclysmic epoch. And I look forward to pursuing this great adventure of survival.