Title: Group Mind pt 1 Dancing Epidemics
Episode #: 17
Episode ID: 6441283
Source: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/6441283-group-mind-pt-1-dancing-epidemics.mp3
------------------------------------------------------------

=== EPISODE METADATA ===
Generated: 2026-01-12 01:02:07
Episode ID: 7820740
MP3 File: 7820740-group-mind-pt-4-the-world-is-a-lot-like-the-internet.mp3
Title: Group Mind pt. 4: The World Is a Lot Like the Internet
Podcast/Artist: Against the Internet
Album/Series: Fight Like An Animal
Source URL: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/7820740-group-mind-pt-4-the-world-is-a-lot-like-the-internet.mp3
========================
What is the highest technique you hope to achieve?
You have no technique.
Very good.
What are your thoughts when facing an opponent?
They don't care.
They don't care.
Greetings friends, I'm Arnold Schroeder and this is Fight Like an Animal.
Find the bibliography for this episode at againsttheinternet.com.
As always, I implore you to write to me so we can start a revolution or fall in love or whatever it is that we are supposed to do.
And if you want to support this show materially, check out patreon.com slash biological singularity.
Man does not live by bread alone.
Particularly when he has plenty of bread.
Ronald Engelhardt, The Silent Revolution.
When I was young I reveled in the liberatory potential of the internet.
I was a 14 year old hacker in 1992.
So I was definitely one of those people who talked about how the internet was going to democratize information.
And society was no longer going to be shaped so disproportionately by the narrow range of perspectives deemed valid by a tiny handful of corporations.
And all the rest.
And I wasn't wrong, but the prophecy did turn out to be a little darker than perhaps my 14 year old self entirely comprehended.
Now, at the time, the internet was a very specific kind of place.
I suppose I hung out on its more deviant corners, but it mostly seemed to consist of deviant corners.
Bomb making instructions were ubiquitous, as was advice for committing credit card fraud.
And these technical exchanges, these criminal technical exchanges mixed freely with endless discussions about everything, about religion, drugs, society, authority, and all the rest.
Which employed a rhetorical style that was very different than the rhetorical styles associated with power outside the internet.
To have power off the internet meant to engage in an overstatedly formal, highly restrained rhetorical mode.
It was like no matter what you were saying, what you were actually saying was, I am capable of this level of formality and restraint.
And no matter what the subject was, you were trying to appeal to some kind of hypothetical common understanding to a hypothetical majority.
You can see this in the debates between Reagan and Nixon and contrast it with politics today.
They both seem insanely erudite and well spoken and just eminently rational compared to anybody involved in political discourse today.
But to have power on the internet was to indulge in the opposite.
It was to appeal to the most niche cultural echelon you could in the most uncompromising and specific way.
The way least comprehensible to those outside that niche.
And it was to use the most inflammatory rhetoric possible.
And of course it was clear at the time that this technology would go from being the exclusive haunt of marginal freaks and disaffected geniuses and whoever else to a central aspect of mainstream society.
And I think that with that transition it was assumed that the internet would ultimately get more like the world.
But that's really not what happened.
What happened is that the world got a lot more like the internet.
There are a bunch of different ways I could justify this statement.
A quantitative or qualitative assessment of how institutional political speech, in other words, the speech of elected policymakers and the like, has radically changed in the last few decades.
As has the speech of like the newscasters and all that.
And how it's assimilated a rhetorical style much closer to that found in internet discussions.
Or one can simply take note of those pivotal moments in our socio-political trajectory that feel like the internet is spilling out into the world.
Like a story coming off the page.
The right-wing street mobilizations that started happening with the beginning of the Trump era really felt like that to me.
It's not like I was a total stranger to confrontations with far-right elements on the street.
But something about what started happening in 2017 felt distinctly like something had transitioned off the internet and into corporeal reality.
And that feeling produced a strange kind of disorienting, dizzying terror distinct from the threat of authoritarianism itself.
It happened across a piece that talks about this very feeling in relation to a few different recent events.
They call the phenomenon breach, right?
And they say we're used to technological disruption, but breach is different.
It's a difference you can't hold in your hands, but when you feel in the air.
It's defined by an eruption of pent-up emotion and imagination from the internet into physical reality.
We saw it during the Capitol riot where Trump was able to manipulate the delusions of those trapped in the fantasy of QAnon.
So before I go any further, maybe I know what you're thinking.
Maybe you're feeling a little trepidatious about this episode and you're thinking like,
okay, there is a whole lot of material out there on how the internet is changing everything and driving everyone crazy.
Is this just another one of those hasn't the internet driven us all completely insane kind of stories?
Maybe you're like, didn't I already read some fucking professor talking about how their students won't tolerate divergent opinions
because the internet made them insane already or whatever.
But no friends, I don't think I'm doing just like my permutation of that same piece that you've already read a thousand times.
Because as always, you know, as much as I've critiqued like the left per se for not having a biological foundation to their social theory,
liberals sure as fuck don't either.
And so, you know, that that style of social theory, the whole like the internet is driving everybody crazy and polarization is increasing.
And we have to appeal to some sort of like common set of understandings genre that, you know, it's very much a liberal genre.
I think that it just lacks any real explanatory power for what is actually happening and why I call.
I mean, I consider the internet is driving everyone crazy.
A subgenre of the broader I'm surprised civilization is collapsing genre that liberals so frequently inhabit.
And the surprise civilization is collapsing genre is exactly what you get when you've been too comfortable for too long
and you don't have an explicitly biological framework to your social theory.
It assumes a consensus used to exist that is in collapse and that consensus never existed.
The shifts that liberals are observing with such horror aren't because people's epistemologies are actually fracturing away from a great liberal consensus that we were all participating in.
We just never were and liberals used to have like a true monopoly on discourse on media and stuff like that.
And so they just were the only prominent voices shaping socio political outcomes and now they're not.
And that's, you know, and that's a beautiful and a terrible thing, but it doesn't reflect nearly as fun.
It's not as surprising. Let's just put it that way as liberals think it is.
And they can only maintain this surprise because they don't incorporate a nateness into their analysis.
So they don't have any framework for understanding individual personality variation and how that maps to like this vast array of very different socio political perceptions
that we see in the world. And they don't understand that material conditions invoke certain like very species typical behavioral paradigms over and over again.
And that we just come up with rationales for those for like our behaviors each time.
And so things like authoritarianism, which liberals think were like a rational experiment that we had like a big rational discussion about in the mid 20th century
and decided was a bad idea, you know, those like and so it's surprising to them that authoritarianism has ascended to the extent that it has.
Phenomena like this ultimately manifest core behavioral paradigms in the human species that are always going to emerge under certain material conditions
without sufficient interventions and, you know, like when certain social forces prevail.
And so that's my extremely brief counterpart to the four part series.
I did the nature nurture death spiral series where I was critiquing academia and like the, you know, like the kind of like far left epistemology that ignores biology.
There's there's my my shout out to liberals and their ignorance of biology.
I mean that that's also what it isn't nonviolent to let people hurt you was largely about.
But yeah, I'm always surprised by the fact that people are so unabashedly willing to write pieces in the surprise civilization is collapsing genre,
because it comes from people who want to be considered experts in social affairs.
And to me, like having expertise in social affairs would imply that you have some predictive power.
So if you're constantly acting surprised, if your constant refrain is I never in my life imagined that I would see this,
which is the constant refrain of the CNNs and New York Times of the world's in response to developments like the capital riots and,
you know, everything just literally everything else that we're seeing in society.
It seems like you're negating the premise of your own expertise.
Nobody on Capitol Hill went to work hunting to cover a riot.
So the thing that would contrast the most starkly with the surprise civilization is collapsing genre, of course,
would be anything that explicitly predicts what we're witnessing now.
And that's the kind of science that we're going to review today, science which was written quite a while ago in a bunch of cases,
but resulted in theories of a general social shift as a result of technological and material change that proved utterly prescient.
One fairly easy thing that we can say is that the Internet is definitely an instance of supernormal stimuli, right?
We covered that a couple episodes ago, talked about, for instance, the example of brownheaded cow birds,
how they lay eggs in other birds nests that have the identifying features of those species offspring to a greater degree
than their actual offspring has so that they engage in a sort of like hyper amplified version of parenting.
Same when the egg hatches and there's these like chilling photographs of birds feeding recent hatchlings that are much bigger than they are
because like the gaping mouth and all the other stimuli that invokes the parental behavior response
are like bigger and more concentrated and more intense than in their own actual offspring
and the biologists will comment that they feel like they're witnessing something very akin to like drug addiction or whatever.
The notion of supernormal stimulus is used with respect to humans quite often for like pornography, junk food,
other aspects of civilization that produce doses of stimuli that are evolutionarily salient,
but hyper potent beyond a degree that evolution ever anticipated.
And we've talked about how the more distinct from kind of like default humanity or like outgroup humanity,
a group signifiers can be. It's like language, it's aesthetics, it's collective behaviors,
it's probably like forms of reasoning, whatever, it's worldview, how the more differentiated from the rest of humanity
that a group can be, the more potent the group participation, neurological reward becomes.
And the internet is definitely a means of creating far more specific and highly differentiated niche group identities
than can be achieved without it. And so it produces a dose of like a psychologically salient stimulus
that definitely evolution has prepared us to be highly responsive to, but evolution really never anticipated the magnitude of.
And so yeah, so the internet just amplifies group dynamics in general of all of the different,
I think at the end of the last episode we kind of like went through a list of every group dynamic
that we had tried to establish so far in the series and you know the internet makes all of those more intense.
And so now we will add some more group dynamics. Last time we were pretty focused on neurobiological mechanisms
and this time we'll talk about material conditions that shift group dynamics.
Well, I think there's a mixture of shock, disbelief, horror. We are hearing very strong words coming from world leaders like Boris Johnson.
The first one we will add to our growing list of interesting properties of human group psychology
and group dynamics as they're playing out in the modern technological milieu is best illustrated perhaps by
the totally like dazed directionless look on the faces of capital rioters on January 6th as they took over
and just seemed very, very unclear on why exactly they had done that or what happened next
and so sort of took some selfies and stole some random shit and whatever.
I just did a Patreon episode about this and I think I did a really good job
and I'm not going to do quite as good of a job in this case.
But one thing that is crucial to understanding things like that is the notion of behavioral dysregulation
resulting from alterations to the brain's dopamine reward circuitry that are an inherent product of living in a civilization
with very little unpredictability for a lot of people in terms of meeting basic physiological needs,
you know, food shelter, that sort of thing, with a ton of access to basic necessities,
a ton of material comfort stability, and then also just like a sort of constant panoply
of really cheap pulses of dopamine being offered to people in different forms.
And so I talked about in that episode there's a ton of really interesting science showing that
there seems to be a general trend in our civilization toward reward deficiency syndrome
towards the brain's dopamine circuitry just being kind of short circuited
and most mainstream science will talk about this only with respect to, for some reason,
the one like just kind of core aspect of our civilization where it is permissible to talk about this
is with like cell phones and social media.
And then for the most part, researchers will only acknowledge this like alterations to the brain's
dopamine circuitry with respect to conditions that they, you know, formally classify as pathologies
that are in like the diagnostic and statistical manual and whatnot, or with respect to drug addiction.
But it's pretty easy to see, you know, I mean, the pathologies that they talk about are becoming
much more common very quickly.
And it's pretty easy to just make the logical inference that if cell phones and social media
and cocaine and whatever else alter people's dopamine circuitry, like probably so does
Netflix and vanilla cream filled puff pastry cookies, which are sitting on my desk right now,
and all the rest of it, right?
But then some neuroscientists actually are talking about how civilization itself is altering our brain's reward circuitry
and basically, you know, presenting a sort of neurobiological critique of consumerism
and how it's rewiring our brains.
But what this does, how it's relevant to the Burning Man Esk freak show that took over the capital
and it's kind of just like insane, uncoordinated, like effusively energetic and self expressive,
but just not very like functional or strategic or meaningful in terms of external outcomes nature
is that changes to the brain's dopamine reward circuitry of this nature just make us not good at doing difficult things.
They make us seek out the more like easily accessible, hyper potent reward stimuli we encounter,
the more we just want to seek out really easily accessible, you know, cheap pulses of dopamine
and the less capable we are of enduring difficulty in the pursuit of rewarding stimuli.
This is, you know, this is the developmental biology of toughness, right?
This is why so much of why people who grow up experiencing different levels of adversity are capable of different levels of adversity
and why people who grow up outside of civilized melews are often regarded by people within civilized melews as shockingly tough.
So because employing your group's unique logic, affirming your group's unique identity is a cheap pulse of dopamine
because that's an easy thing to do and it's deeply pleasurable.
It, you know, as as we examined in the last episode and because thinking outside of your group's epistemology,
like adopting perspectives that are divergent from your own requires work and involves enduring some discomfort.
People are doing it less and less like people are getting more and more addicted to the cocaine,
the longer civilization goes on and the more their reward circuitry is fucked up
by being able to drive through like the drive through 24 hours a day and get the like delicious milkshake
and go home and watch, you know, something from a pool of potentially like tens of thousands of different films or whatever,
the more they get addicted to the dopamine pulse of affirming unique group identity
and like the nature of the reward system is such that and you will always habituate to any given level of reward
that especially if it's easy to access.
And so the group identity reward is only as potent if you kind of enhance the logic of the group more
and like take it to a slightly more extreme permutation every time that you are affirming your group identity.
So that becomes one runaway dynamic.
There is the very distinct sense in which the January 6 Capitol riots were a totally plausible attempt
at authoritarian, right-wing authoritarian takeover on one hand and then on the other,
were just this like singularly pathetic expression of just uncoordinated, undisciplined,
and unstrategic self-expression.
And this is exactly the kind of coup attempt that we would expect to see in a society that had become decadent
from too much cheap dopamine.
I don't know, I spent years of my life addicted to heroin and I think it is so interesting.
How fucking, I mean, these perceptions are kind of shifting because now everybody seems to have like an uncle
strung out or whatever. This was not, I definitely was an addict when it was still like a lot more popular
to be like overtly dehumanizing towards drug addicts.
And I just have always been so baffled by people's ability to be judgmental of drug addiction
because as far as I can tell, we live in a society that is just totally constituted
around, I guess, addiction per se or at least like shortcuts in the brain's reward circuitry
that are fundamentally the same thing as what's happening in addiction.
So yeah, that's one aspect of what we're experiencing.
Behavioral dysregulation resulting from alterations to the brain's dopamine circuitry
which make people more prone to a hyper exaggerated form of like group identity affirmation
and less willing to examine alternate perspectives.
And then the second, new dynamic will introduce strongly related to the first.
Its borders are conceptually amorphous.
I don't know, perhaps could be best illustrated by the advent of Cambodian psychedelic rock in the 1960s.
I was living with a woman in the bay earlier this year who just loved, loves, I assume, Cambodian psychedelic rock.
Like listen to it a lot and it's pretty fucking good. I got pretty into it.
And while the Cambodian was particularly prominent in her playlists,
we would also end up spending a much a time listening to like Middle Eastern psychedelic rock
and South American psychedelic rock.
And it's so fascinating to see how at around the same time all over the world
in all of these countries with vastly different cultural backgrounds and whatnot
this explosion of self expression took place sometime in the 1960s
and psychedelic rock was just one of its many, many manifestations.
It's like suddenly all around the world people both felt like it was imperative for them to say something
and like they had these hyper sophisticated and new tools for saying it.
And of course it's not a coincidence that this happened in so many places all right around the same time.
It's just the result of people growing up with a greater degree of material abundance than anybody had before in history.
And scientists who talk about the Anthropocene in like a sort of formal like stratigraphic sense
like they're like trying to apply the same methods of geology that have been used for establishing past geological epochs
What about the period after World War II as the Great Acceleration?
So they'll often use 1945 as a proposed threshold for the beginning of the Anthropocene
and that is partially because it leaves because the detonation of the first nuclear bombs does in fact leave like a stratigraphic signature.
I don't know if I'm pronouncing that right but you know geological strata, stratigraphy.
And in radioactive isotopes that are still laying around but then also because the period after World War II sees this great acceleration in the consumption of natural resources.
So we have populations all around the world living with greater material comfort and stability than had ever before been the case.
And the first generation to grow up exclusively with that material comfort and stability
is also the first generation to engage in a bunch of new forms of self-expression and sociopolitical contestation.
And that is not a coincidence.
What that illustrates, what that generational shift illustrates is a general trend in our society towards hyper-specialization and niche forms of self-expression
and the capacity of technology to allow certain innate differences within the human population to be more clearly expressed.
That's kind of the fundamental theme that we're grappling with today.
It's how technology amplifies innate differences.
And so this trend towards hyper-specialization has been going on for a long time
and maybe could be said to have two kind of distinct phases.
Obviously since well before the internet or what we would necessarily describe as modernity
people were functionally specializing, if we look at traditional societies
one of their primary contrasting attributes with our own societies
is a fairly cohesive set of skills belonging to almost all people within those societies.
And then as technology progresses people are competent in respectively smaller and smaller domains.
They possess a smaller and smaller proportion of the overall skill set that is possessed within the society they inhabit
but they possess often like a degree of skill with whatever it is they are competent with.
That's really dramatic so that's the nature of specialization.
It's the development of hyper-competence in a given domain
but that logically comes at the expense of competence in other domains.
And so there's the kind of like material occupational like the corporeal phase of that
as everybody becomes like a blacksmith and then like an industrial worker on an assembly line or whatever.
But then of course there's also a sort of like information and reasoning process version of that
which kind of happened later.
And so to get into the science that I promised that so accurately predicted what we are experiencing right now
we'll talk about Ronald Inglehart's book The Silent Revolution
Changing Values and Political Styles Among Western Publix.
It was written in 1977.
So this is just so, so long before liberals started writing pieces for the Atlantic or whatever
about how the internet was driving everybody crazy.
And Inglehart, unlike so many social theorists, did incorporate biology into his understanding.
Some very simple biology. Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs.
So in The Silent Revolution he talks about the shift from materialism to post-materialism.
And I know that post-materialism sounds like something you read impossibly dense theory about
and then have difficulty concisely defining when you're done
but it's actually breathtakingly simple. He lays it out in the first few pages of the book.
It's just the shift in values, priorities and perceptions
that occur when you haven't experienced physical scarcity and you don't expect to.
To quote,
The basic value priorities of Western Publix seem to be changing as their societies move into a post-industrial phase of development.
Why is value change taking place?
It seems to be linked with a cluster of socioeconomic changes including rising levels of education,
shifts in the occupational structure and the development of increasingly broad and effective mass communication networks.
But two phenomena seem particularly significant.
One, the unprecedented prosperity experienced by Western nations during the decades following World War II.
The absence of total war.
The simple fact that no Western nation has been invaded for 30 years may have extremely significant consequences.
In short, people are safe and they have enough to eat.
These two basic facts have far-reaching implications.
Our expectation that the value priorities of Western Publix are changing is derived from two key hypotheses.
The first is that people tend to place a high priority on whatever needs are in short supply.
As a result of the two phenomena just mentioned,
Western Publix have for a number of years experienced exceptionally high levels of economic and physical security.
Consequently, they have begun to give increasing emphasis to other types of needs.
If we wish to go beyond this simple explanatory scheme,
the work of Abraham Maslow is particularly interesting.
For it suggests a specific direction in which value change will move under given condition.
Maslow argues that people act to fulfill a number of different needs which are pursued in hierarchical order,
according to their relative urgency for survival.
Top priority is given to the satisfaction of physiological needs as long as they are in short supply.
The need for physical safety comes next.
Its priority is almost as high as that of the sustenance needs, but a hungry man will risk his life to give food.
Once an individual has attained physical and economic security,
he may begin to pursue other non-material goals.
These other goals reflect genuine and normal needs,
although people may fail to give them attention when deprived of the sustenance or safety needs.
But when at least minimal economic and physical security are present,
the needs for love, belonging, and esteem become increasingly important,
and later, a set of goals related to intellectual and aesthetic satisfaction looms large.
There does not seem to be any clear hierarchy within the last set of needs,
which Maslow calls self-actualization needs.
But there is evidence that they become most salient only after an individual has satisfied the material needs and belonging needs.
End quote.
So that's one aspect of this trend toward hyper-specialization and information consumption and self-expression.
It's just the fact that there's the time and resources, the material security and stability,
to pursue whatever forms of self-expression are most compelling to a given individual.
Liberals love to talk about things that are very precedented,
like they're unprecedented, like authoritarianism, for instance.
But this is actually unprecedented.
An innate personality variation used to be constrained considerably by material conditions.
Differences between people simply weren't clearly expressed
because people were united in material struggles that required roughly similar responses.
Everybody didn't have time to craft their own unique cosmologies and inhabit them.
But the other aspect of this trend towards hyper-specialization
and towards everybody living within their own distinct mythology,
of course, is just the saturation of communication technology.
Engelhardt wrote in 1977, so this is well before the internet, per se, was reshaping society,
but he saw that the combination of a shift to post-materialist values
and the ability of everybody to participate on some level in mass communication
was going to have profound consequences.
And so he made a litany of predictions that better characterize what the internet has done to society
than people still manage today watching it happen.
To justify this statement, I'm going to read a passage about Engelhardt's The Silent Revolution
that comes from a book called The Big Sort, why the clustering of like-minded America is tearing us apart.
In the early 1970s, Professor Ronald Engelhardt at the University of Michigan proposed a theory
for why all industrialized countries appeared to be undergoing similar changes in their cultures and politics.
He theorized that rapid economic development had produced a new world view
that was gradually replacing the outlook that had dominated industrializing societies since the Industrial Revolution.
The fulfillment of material needs would generally be taken for granted
and education levels would rise along with incomes, he surmised.
And all that material progress, he found, brings unforeseen changes,
change in gender roles, attitudes toward authority and sexual norms,
declining fertility rates, broader political participation, and less easily led publics.
Engelhardt's theory made predictions for these post-materialist societies.
People would lose interest in traditional religion.
They would become increasingly involved with notions of personal spirituality.
Class, economic growth, and military security would decline in political importance,
replaced by issues of personal freedom, abortion rights, gay rights, and the environment.
Material goods would lose cachet as people sought to fill their lives with unique experiences.
People would be less inclined to obey central authority and would lose trust in traditional hierarchical institutions,
the big organizations that had created America's modern industrial society,
the federal government, broad-based civic groups, and traditional church denominations.
Furthermore, people wouldn't participate in politics in the same old ways, Engelhardt hypothesized.
Instead of being elite-directed, they would engage in elite-challenging activities.
They would vote less, but be more likely to join a boycott or sign a petition.
People wouldn't become disengaged from politics even though voting percentages would decline.
Rather, they would adopt a politics of self-expression.
Post-materialists wouldn't settle for picking between two candidates.
They would want to make decisions themselves, acting more directly on their political choices
instead of following the orders of leaders.
Engelhardt predicted one more aspect of this post-materialist phenomenon.
Since the cultural transformation would happen at a generational pace, it would be in a sense a silent revolution.
People would assume that the erosion of confidence in government, religion, and social institutions
was because these institutions were singularly corrupt or inefficient.
But the decline of trust wouldn't be peculiar to a place or government, Engelhardt wrote.
We are witnessing a downward trend in trust in government and confidence in leaders across most industrial societies.
So again, I just have to say, if having some predictive capacity is any kind of basis for a claim to fucking expertise,
I mean I really have to think about all these other people who were writing very divergent forms of social theory in the 1970s
and making a whole bunch of predictions that absolutely did not manifest.
And just contrast that with this pretty good description of what's happening right now that's from like 50 years ago.
I mean, admittedly, when he wrote Engelhardt had seen the 60s.
So, you know, there was already some empirical basis.
But he predicted, of course, that this would become a more widespread phenomenon, which it very clearly has.
Engelhardt started his research just by asking a set of like a few very incredibly simple questions in a bunch of different countries.
Engelhardt, by the way, his work evolved into the World Values Survey, which I have discussed on this podcast before.
And it provides one of the foundations for saying that there's definitely a broad cross-cultural phenomenon of right-left politics.
That's pretty stable across a bunch of very diverse economic, social, and political conditions.
And that right-left political continuum has corollaries with basic aspects of psychology and fundamental personal values that are also cross-culturally uniform.
But yeah, he asked people a couple really simple questions in a bunch of different industrializing western nations.
And the questions basically, you know, they were about what was most important to people.
And they were essentially, they essentially occupied two categories.
And one, of course, was some material questions, you know, like, is what's most important to you?
Gaining some greater level of like physical safety, material comfort, or whatever.
And then the other category of questions were about self-actualization, self-expression, participation.
And what he found was that younger people, people who had grown up, who were born after World War II
and had only ever known the relative material abundance and security of post-war society,
were overwhelmingly more likely to say that their highest priorities involved self-expression and self-actualization.
And so that's pretty interesting in and of itself, but the political changes that he saw this ultimately resulting in
and quantified the early trends toward were really far-reaching.
At the time he wrote, it hadn't entirely happened, but he predicted the decoupling of class and left-right voting patterns.
As left-right, you know, used to be the case that leftists really did have something of a monopoly on working class voters.
But he predicted this decoupling as left-right politics took on a decreasingly material emphasis
for one based on, you know, culture wars, morality, basic personal values.
And so, of course, this prediction proved very, very accurate, although it seems to continually still surprise politically engaged people
that so much of the public is willing to vote in explicit opposition to their material interests.
And as significant as that shift has been, Engelhardt also predicted very precisely the more fundamental challenges
to the entire institutional political structure that contemporary liberal commentators spend so much time being surprised by.
As he said, the future looks difficult for Western governments.
If they do not solve current economic problems, they risk losing the support of the materialist majority of their citizens.
But renewed prosperity has its own dangers.
It seems likely to evoke a new set of challenges and demands.
And so he saw this fundamental paradox in a very, like, materially abundant, stable civilization.
Which is that if you don't, you know, if that's not provided for people, then they're going to agitate against the power structure
in order to get what they're hungry for.
But if you feed them enough, then they're going to develop a value system about self-expression in their own agency,
their own, their disinclination to be, you know, the subject of a broader system
and their desire to set the terms of their own existence that will also end up producing a challenge to the power structure.
Engelhardt talked about something called cognitive mobilization.
That was his term for, like, the effects of everybody becoming kind of an information specialist
and mass communications technologies becoming available to everybody.
Because the skills necessary to politically participate were fairly limited in their distribution
throughout most of the history of large complex states.
Most people really didn't have those skills.
But material stability and communications technology changes that.
Engelhardt saw that the combination of physical security, increasing rates of education,
and increasing availability of mass communications technologies well before the Internet
was turning everybody into a sort of information and communications expert.
And that this created the framework for much broader based contestation of the sociopolitical terrain.
And the shift to post-materialist values imply that this contestation would have a particular nature.
Quote,
Western publics are developing an increasing potential for political participation.
This change does not imply that mass publics will simply show higher rates of participation
in traditional activities such as voting.
But that they may intervene in the political process on a qualitatively different level.
Increasingly, they are likely to demand participation in making major decisions,
not just a voice in selecting the decision makers.
The two processes tend to reinforce each other.
Changes occurring not only in the goals of Western publics, but also in the way they pursue them.
These changes have important implications for established political parties,
labor unions, and professional organizations.
For mass politics are increasingly apt to be elite challenging rather than elite directed.
The source of these changes is a shift in the balance of political skills between elites and mass.
And then, yeah, prefiguring, you know, the Internet,
he talks about communication technology saying the effects of rising educational levels
are probably reinforced by the permeation of electronic media,
which bring political information even to those without much formal education.
Radio and even more so television make distant political events seem near and vital.
And then there's a bunch of statistics about how common television has become in Western nations,
which we probably don't need to read.
But of course, and I think that this is an aspect that Engelhardt didn't really touch on as much,
kind of maybe missed altogether.
This new kind of politics wouldn't just be elite challenging.
It would be predicated on a fundamental drive towards self-expression,
which means in practice it would tend to be fairly chaotic, undisciplined,
and not particularly oriented toward outcomes.
In other words, a lot like politics has gotten.
If you're an organizer and you're fighting to affect external outcomes,
you've probably had this experience before where you realize that there's a fairly significant
impetus on the part of a lot of people to participate politically,
but that their politics really are about self-expression and affirming some kind of identity
much more than they're about shifting anything in the corporeal world.
If you want to read a whole book about this reality from an organizer's perspective,
if you want to read an organizer lamenting the fact that politics has become
a mode of self-expression and subcultural identity affirmation
rather than a means of affecting external outcomes,
check out Hegemoni How To, A Roadmap for Radicals by Jonathan Matthew Smucker.
Well, I think there's a mixture of shock, disbelief, horror.
We are hearing very strong words coming from world leaders like Boris Johnson.
Like I said, Engelhardt had already seen the 60s when he wrote.
So, you know, his predictions are one degree less kind of shockingly prescient
than they would be if that hadn't been the case.
Because, of course, what he's describing is a long-term sort of inexorable trend,
but the social upheavals of the 1960s were the first kind of like really visible
significant manifestation of the trend.
And these social upheavals occurred uniformly in most prosperous industrialized nations.
And they were the first manifestation of this new highly participatory,
elite-challenging, self-expression-oriented form of politics.
Everything about them accords perfectly well with the post-materialist framework.
I mean, the American version of the 1960s saw political tumult
related to some specifically American issues, particularly race in the Vietnam War.
But the dynamics of protests that played out in America were strongly paralleled
in other countries where these were not issues, like the Netherlands or Japan.
The fundamental predictive corollary of these protest dynamics
is technologically intensive economic development with its consequent material stability.
Contrary to past moments of revolutionary social rupture, like those in the Great Depression,
those most likely to participate in protest movements during this phase of social rupture
weren't in positions of material precarity, but relative affluence.
There were people like middle-class college students.
The extent to which they identified with post-materialist values,
the extent to which a college student responding to surveys
indicated that their highest priorities related to self-expression
and intellectual, spiritual, and aesthetic satisfaction
were strongly predictive of support for protest movements.
And then it was right at this time that class and left-right orientation
decoupled in the voting behavior of the U.S. public.
It was also right at this time, specifically in 1965, for whatever reason,
was the year that trust in formal institutions of power
began to radically decline on both the right and the left.
Because they were very concentrated in time, very dramatic,
and resulted in a special election, a significant shift in voting behavior in the public,
the May 1968 uprisings in France are particularly illustrative.
The mass protests and perceived threat of civil war that resulted
produced significant left-right polarization in France.
But again, it also ruptured the traditional class associations with left-right politics.
Middle-class students perceived the instability more favorably
than did working-class people.
And many workers shifted their voting behavior to the right
in response to the upheaval.
Workers and students alike participated in the May revolt.
But students were much more likely, when asked,
to select items from a questionnaire about why they were protesting
that related to fundamentally reshaping society along more participatory,
less depersonalized lines.
Workers were far more likely to select items that related to concrete economic gains
rather than a total restructuring of social relations.
To use David Graber's turn of phrase, students were fighting alienation
while workers were fighting oppression. Quoting from Engelhardt,
To the extent that it was based on different underlying values,
the alliance between student activists and striking workers was doomed.
The more so because the student leaders tended to confuse rhetoric with reality.
The consumer society deserves to die a violent death, said Daniel Cohn Bennett.
We refuse a world where the certainty of not dying of hunger
is gained at the risk of dying of boredom.
But to the striking workers, especially the older ones,
it was not so certain that the risk of hunger had been forever eliminated.
The consumer society was a world they had just entered,
and it seemed very attractive.
But so like I said, the aspect of this that Engelhardt doesn't seem to emphasize,
I guess maybe the aspect that you would tend to emphasize more
if you are a political organizer, is that the other aspect of this new
high participation, elite challenging, self-expression oriented politics
that emerges in the 1960s, is that the very impetus for its emergence
was also the basis of its inevitable failure.
The fact that achieving aesthetic and intellectual self-realization
were fundamental motivations meant that the style of politics people employed
was going to tend towards chaos, was going to have the feel of a performance
more than an effort to shift conditions in the corporeal world,
and that whenever it got tedious or frustrating or scary,
people were likely to wander off the map of sociopolitical contestation
in favor of, you know, doing some yoga or becoming Jungian psychologists
or whatever else seemed like the highest form of self-realization
and expression that they could achieve, and that's exactly what happened.
So now there's an aspect of the post-materialist shift
that I am really not sure anyone has noted before,
and I'm kind of proud of it.
Here's what you get from me that you don't get from reading some liberal
in the Atlantic or whatever.
When we look at the shift to post-materialist values,
with its consequent shift in the modes of political contestation,
we see a huge right-left differential.
But the differential is temporal rather than one of absolute outcomes.
Basically, what the left did in the 1960s, the right is doing right now.
Let's briefly review some of the psychological corollaries
of left-right political orientation that we've discussed on this show before
to see how this is exactly what we would expect, first of all.
We've seen that right-left orientation in many different countries
with many different political and economic histories
is predicted by people's preference for security or stimulation.
People who rank having an exciting life as a higher priority
tend toward more egalitarian politics.
The more one values stimulation over security,
the more egalitarian ones politics tend to be.
Openness to new experience, one of the big five personality dimensions
which is found not just cross-culturally in humans but in other species as well
strongly predicts voting behavior in the US much better than variables like income
with more openness predicting more egalitarianism.
And we've seen that fearfulness is a very fundamental theme in right-left difference.
One massive review of thousands of papers
found self-reported fear of death to be the psychological variable
with the strongest positive correlation with right-wing politics.
Right-wingers are more likely to classify faces as threatening,
more physiologically responsive as measured by skin conductance change
and blink amplitude to sudden loud noises and threatening images,
exhibit less exploratory and risk-taking behavior in cognitive tests
and have bigger amygdalae, the brain region central to the experience of fear and aggression.
We would therefore expect those born with the innate psychological profiles
that tend to produce right-wing politics to be less responsive,
at least less readily to the conditions which produce the post-materialist shift in others.
After all, the fundamental nature of this shift is that one perceives themselves
to be materially secure to the point where they are no longer fearful of scarcity,
and this shift in perception engenders an openness to explore new facets
of self-expression and self-realization.
So if people innately vary in how fearful and how open to experience they are,
in this variation maps to political difference, we'd expect a right-left differential
in the post-materialist shift.
But, recall friends, how I've said many times that these innate differences are not
in the absolute presence or absence of different behavioral and perceptual paradigms
that exist in the human population.
We all have the same software.
The same potentials are latent within all of us.
The difference is in thresholds for activating one behavioral and perceptual paradigm
over another.
We've discussed this a little bit with the rightward shift our society took after 9-11.
How it turned out that a bunch of people with liberal or left values
were perfectly capable of right-wing thinking, how it lived somewhere inside of them,
and it just took a greater level of perceived external threat to invoke it
than it did for the proportion of the population that was already right-wing before 9-11.
But with the post-materialist shift, we see material changes that produce a diminished sense of threat.
And sure enough, it produced changes in the whole population,
but it took the right 50 years longer or so to respond to this diminished sense of threat
than to people who oriented left, people who were young, people who were college students, all that.
So, all that is to say right now, like a concise rephrasing of what I just said,
is that the right is having its 1960s, and it is just as freaky and fucked up as one would expect.
But this doesn't just mean that they're engaging in elite challenging politics.
It also means that the style of politics they're embracing has exactly the same
carnival-esque, chaotic quality, the same undisciplined profusion of self-expression
that characterized egalitarian movements starting in the 1960s and has characterized them ever since.
It's the same combination of characteristics that makes a faction's politics both highly contentious
but also kind of hard to take seriously on some level.
And we can even see how the right's post-materialist shift carries all the same bizarre idiosyncratic nuance as the left's,
because the right's new mode of contestation is accompanied by a sudden interest in following health gurus
and taking weird supplements and inventing an infinity of new cosmologies,
just like the left started doing in the 1960s.
There's been a litany of articles recently expressing surprise
that QAnon and New Age spirituality seem to be converging, but it's exactly what we'd expect
if the post-materialist shift had broadly similar patterns on both the left and the right,
with their main difference being one of timing.
Okay, so the internet.
And group psychology.
What all the foregoing is intended to illustrate in a broader sense
is that our society is on a trend toward hyper-specialization,
where communications technology has allowed people to sort themselves into distinct information
spheres based on innate differences, and then engage in all the unique self-expression
that this self-selection into different information spheres facilitates.
And this, of course, absolutely does not stop at right-left difference.
That's kind of what we covered today, but the landscape of innate variation
in cognitive styles and biases is vast and intricately nuanced.
And the nature of the process is such that the more specific a niche one finds,
the more rewarding it tends to be to the mechanisms of group psychology.
Again, recall the notion of the supernormal stimulus
and the evolutionarily outsized appeal of hyper-specific means of affirming group identity.
The more obscurely removed from the rest of humanity a group's logic, aesthetics,
behavior, and means of cohesion are, the more powerful the reward of group belonging is.
While these dynamics were already emerging, with the advent of mass communications technology in general,
the internet has affected a wholesale shift in their intensity,
similar to the transition from, say, smoking heroin to shooting it.
I guess since I'm fond of noting when I'm trafficking in homology as opposed to analogy,
this would be one such case, because ultimately some of the reward circuitry
is going to be the same between affirming group identity and shooting dope.
And so some day we have to assume absent imminent nuclear holocaust
or total ecological collapse that psychometrics will catch up with the internet.
And by this I mean, you know, because innate-ness is so often revealed through co-variation.
When two traits that a person possesses that are logically unrelated
are nonetheless statistically related in a population, that tells us something about how people are built.
So just like there's currently papers with titles like music preferences are linked to cognitive styles,
which map one's musical choices to personality type into the degree of empathy one possesses
and to whether one tends towards empathizing or systematizing,
someday there will be papers that show a relationship between, you know,
patterns of brain activity and presence on different subreddits
or correlations between the approach one takes to solving some experimental puzzle task
and the channels one subscribes to on YouTube.
I mean, we already have some of this science through entities like the Cambridge Center for Psychometrics,
the progenitor of the notorious Cambridge Analytica,
who are busy correlating one's presence on a particular corner of the internet
with a whole range of personality variables that have an innate component.
So a truly unprecedented process is occurring,
where people are sorting themselves into different information tribes,
each with a distinct frame of reference and mode of communicating based on their innate cognitive biases.
As society gets more materially cohesive, it gets more perceptually divergent.
Never before has everywhere been so similar.
Everywhere has the same Starbucks,
but never before have people sitting in the same Starbucks had such wildly divergent perceptions of the world.
And the nature of the post-materialist shift with respect to group psychology
is that the psychological mechanisms of group participation,
which evolved with respect to a group one was physically a part of
and shared in the material fortunes of,
are being invoked for the information tribes we establish on the internet.
The social and technological trajectory has set us adrift from the group membership we have evolved to need.
In the history of materially affluent societies,
is one of people scrambling to find some other framework to meet this need.
One of the many manifestations of this drive was the proliferation of religious cults
that occurred after the post-materialist shift, probably peaking in the 80s.
I've heard the internet described as the culprit of the cult decline that was happening by the end of the 90s,
but the reason given was that the internet allowed people to fact-check the claims of cults.
And this notion does not accord very well with the reality of the world we're living in.
It doesn't really seem like people are particularly more prone to fact-checking their niche beliefs than they used to be.
If the internet killed cults, I would say instead it did so by replacing them,
by offering an even more specialized avenue of self-expression and niche group identity construction
than people could get in the corporeal world.
So this is unprecedented because when group membership was based on geography and material conditions,
it tended to diminish the expression of innate difference.
All of the mechanisms of perceptual and behavioral cohesion we've discussed in past episodes,
the tendency of oxytocin to make people's judgments more like the group's judgments,
the ability of highly idiosyncratic behaviors to become contagious, all that.
All of these tendencies make people who are different act more similarly
when the grouping is geographical and material,
when the group is everyone who hunts in an area and shares a fire at night,
or everyone who speaks the same language and can swing a sword,
or everyone who is employed in mining in West Virginia or whatever.
It's only with the post-materialist shift and then intensifying greatly with the internet
that groups are based on innate personality variations.
Therefore based on differences between people,
and therefore group dynamics are amplifying innate difference.
And boy do group dynamics amplify difference.
Now that we've all found our tribes on the internet
and we're basing our fundamental sense of ourselves on the people we've found in the world
who are most like us,
who share our unique reasoning processes and aesthetics and frames the most,
let's look at one other aspect of group psychology we've yet to cover so far in the series.
Quoting again from the big sort.
Beginning in the 1960s,
social psychologists came to understand that like-minded groups not only enforced conformity,
but also tended to grow more extreme.
The discovery began with a misdirection.
In 1961, a graduate student named James Stoner
asked subjects in an experiment to consider the prospects of George,
a competent chess player who had the misfortune of drawing a top-ranked player in a tournament's early round.
The game begins and George sees an opportunity to attempt a risky play that could bring quick victory.
If it failed, however, it would result in certain defeat.
The subjects were then asked if George should attempt the risky play
if there was a 10% chance of success, a 20% chance, and so on.
The subjects decided individually at what odds George should try the maneuver.
They were then asked to discuss as a group what George should do and arrive at a joint decision.
What Stoner found and what other researchers around the world would also find in subsequent experiments
was that the group always made a riskier recommendation than the average of the individual decisions.
If, for example, the average of the individual judgments was that George should try the play
if there was a 30% chance of success,
the group would agree that George should take the risk if it paid off only 20% of the time.
The consistent finding in this experiment became known as the risky shift phenomenon,
and as a piece of social-psychological research, it was both provocative and deceptive.
When the experiment was repeated in different ways and in different countries,
researchers noticed a kink in the risky shift.
In the chess game situation, most people thought the overmatched George should take a risk,
but what if the hypothetical game was played from the point of view of the chess champion?
In this scenario, individuals in the group leaned toward a restrained approach,
and the group decision was more conservative than the average of the individual answers.
Although the group decision still shifted from the average, in this case it became more risk-averse.
Social psychologists concluded by the end of the 1960s that what Stoner had discovered
in his chess tournament experiment was the phenomenon of group polarization
that groups over time become more extreme in the direction of the average opinion of the individual group members.
Stoner's chess tournament advisors were inclined as individuals toward a risky play,
and so their group decision was even riskier.
In a different setting, where individuals were cautious, the group derived at an even more cautious decision.
Either way, the effective discussion was to push the group and individuals toward the extreme.
And so, you know, this type of research has been replicated not just with moves in a chess tournament,
but with, you know, socio-political judgments and the like and the effect indoors.
So by sorting ourselves into information tribes that already share a bunch of our cognitive biases
and our basic conclusions, we allow ourselves to manifest more dramatic versions
of those cognitive biases and the basic reasoning processes that we employ than we would otherwise.
And so it is truly no wonder that we've entered such an age of mutual incomprehension,
and it is truly impossible for anyone to explicitly predict where all of this is going.
But as we assess prospects for the survival of our species and the planet,
we should be extremely aware of this reality, of a vast landscape of hyper-specific information subcultures.
Which is to say, this could perhaps be rephrased as,
those who wish to create social conditions in which life on Earth has any hope of survival
should catch up strategically with marketers.
Because this is exactly how marketers think.
And what they do really works, you know, you think that they,
you think they divide the population into like working class and bourgeoisie,
or like black and white or whatever.
No, they identify hyper-specific, you know, some marketing literature calls them image tribes.
I've been using this phrase, information tribes throughout the podcast.
But however you want to think about it, they, you know, they orient towards
hyper-specific demographics that are like all obsessed with some particular thing
and sharing some like very unique frame of reference.
And they're super aware that the more you appeal,
that if you appeal to people's broad based identities that you don't really get too far,
and that the more you appeal to their niche identities,
the more that you can actually start talking with them.
And so, you know, marketers employ a strategy that I really think, you know,
if you had a political process that was similar,
you would be employing a level of power that political agitation really hasn't been able to
since the age when people organized in like, you know,
these like broad based civic entities like churches and labor unions and stuff
that just are not nearly as relevant anymore.
But where they try to find ambassadors essentially within any given like hyper niche little subculture
and the ambassador is somebody who's prominent in that niche subculture
and knows how to like really speak its language and invoke its values
and, you know, that just turns out to be infinitely more valuable
in communicating with people in this, you know, post-materialist society that we inhabit
than talking to trying to talk to everybody who struggles paycheck to paycheck
or is Latino or whatever.
I actually had a whole section on marketing prepared for this podcast
but I think I'm going to jettison it.
As always, I'm excising a great deal of material from this recording.
It's hard to overstate. I did it exactly once.
It's hard to overstate how vast and weird these would get
if I just allowed myself unrestrained digressions
and like, you know, just sort of explored every single facet of something.
I tried with some episode a couple of months ago
and I was just like, I'll just let myself go.
If I think it's interesting, probably other people will think it's interesting
and just like really indulged in as hyper-literary and aggressive of a podcast
as I felt inclined to make.
And then I listened to that thing and I was like,
nope, exercise heavy, heavy editorial influence on yourself.
So yeah, maybe we'll get more into the magic of marketing
and what it can tell us about revolutionary politics some other time.
Next time I think, I have, this group psychology series is just an entity unto itself.
I have no idea ultimately where it's going.
I have probably material for three or four more episodes in it already
more or less laid out.
And I think the one I'm going to do when we next meet friends
is one on individual personality variation and how it affects group dynamics,
how there are some types of people who tend to have an outsize effect on groups
and how that's kind of the story of the world in a way.
We'll talk about like the formation of early states.
We'll talk about Donald fucking Trump.
We'll talk about all kinds of interesting stuff.
So until that time, thanks for listening and we will talk again soon.