Title: Scientific Militant pt 1
Episode #: 18
Episode ID: 6596359
Source: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/6596359-scientific-militant-pt-1.mp3
------------------------------------------------------------

=== EPISODE METADATA ===
Generated: 2026-01-12 01:02:07
Episode ID: 7714378
MP3 File: 7714378-heal-like-an-animal-interview-with-joshua-sylvae-pt-2.mp3
Title: Untitled Episode
Podcast/Artist: Against the Internet
Album/Series: Fight Like An Animal
Source URL: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/7714378-heal-like-an-animal-interview-with-joshua-sylvae-pt-2.mp3
========================
Now in this experiment, this is the apparatus we use that looks diabolical, that's just the way the baby monkey feels about it.
Placing on, loud sounds, movie mechanical parts, all of these things are designed to frighten a monkey.
Greetings friends, I'm Arnold Schroeder and this is Fight Like an Animal, the second of what I believe will be three interviews with Joshua Silva.
Which continues one of, I guess, four series that I'm currently producing simultaneously.
Contrary to a fairly earnest promise that I made an episode or two ago, that I wouldn't initiate new series without wrapping up some of the ones that I was already doing.
And it's interesting, this process just is exceptionally inherently chaotic for me right now because of my health.
Actually, right before this interview when Joshua and I were just talking, he mentioned that he got the impression from listening to my podcast that one motivation was simply a sense that my life might be not particularly much longer.
And that is emphatically true, that is one of the reasons that I'm setting down on some level kind of a life of observations in a fairly rapid tempo because I'm not sure that it's going to be an option for me to say anything I'm saying now in say like ten years.
I mean, I'm nothing if not a fighter, so I guess we'll see.
But just in terms of like the kind of daily rhythm of trying to produce this material, it's essentially like I end up totally debilitated for periods of time.
There's days where I'm like, huh, I guess instead of making podcasts and writing today, I will vomit and gasp for breath or whatever.
And then there are these times when I find some degree, let's not say that I feel good or anything, but I find a degree of functionality and it's like, you know, then I'm possessed by this overwhelming inclination to work as hard as I can, as fast as I can.
So the kind of like structure of this project has a very, is very, very erratic.
And you know, has these like phases of frenzied productivity and these phases of just like complete withdrawal from the world.
And so, you know, sometimes I just find myself, I don't really have the roadmap that I have for doing this is like, I definitely know the material that I want to traverse.
But the actual sequence and timing of that is sort of left to fate on some level and just like is sort of a matter of raw compulsion.
I'm definitely somebody who works on the basis of like, there's no, there's no discipline involved in this project at all.
This is definitely, this is definitely the a function of like a compulsion to binge produce material that is sometimes there and sometimes isn't.
So anyway, all that is to say thank you for bearing with me through, you know, a not particularly linear process of production.
And if I'm fortunate, you know, I'll get to the point where I can take everything that I've covered in this podcast and put it all into a book.
And that'll feel like I achieved some level of decisiveness with this whole endeavor or something.
And yeah, I thought that this interview covered a lot of important ground and added substantially to the overall framework that we're trying to create.
So I'll just say, check me out on patreon.com slash biological singularity.
If you'd like to support the show, the last episode was a Patreon only episode, at least for the time being.
And as always, I encourage correspondence of all varieties.
And here's me and Joshua.
Okay, great. I am here again with Joshua Silve and we are talking about the relationship.
Last time we got into cross species nature of trauma response and trauma recovery, somatic experiencing and the unique theoretical framework it brings to the field of trauma.
And today I'm hoping to ask you a bunch of questions, Joshua, about the way that our social structure interfaces with our ability to heal while creates trauma and interfaces with our ability to heal from trauma.
And I guess if we were going to start at the beginning, that would be child.
And I wonder if you could tell me what you think characterizes hunter-gatherer childhoods and in particular what distinguishes them from childhood in our modern technological milieu.
There's so many different facets of that.
You know, one of the stunning and kind of staggering things about the world that we live in is just how counter to our evolved tendencies it is.
There's so many different ways in which the culture that we're in fails to deliver the conditions that the human organism is born into this world expecting.
And some would say and I would say really needs to develop resilience and an orientation toward wellness and psychological maturity.
So this could be a long answer, unfortunately.
But, you know, so I guess we could start at the very, very beginning, which is birth.
You know, when we think about the birth sequence and a lot of earth based cultures, there's a very intelligent unfolding to it.
So, you know, when you think about birth, some people will say that, oh, birth is inherently traumatic.
You know, it's just this overwhelming thing that we all have to go through.
And, you know, that there's some way in which it's just inherently disfiguring for us.
And as I pointed to last time when we were talking, I tend to think, you know, that if there were these design flaws built into the human experience,
you know, we really wouldn't have done as well as we did.
And, you know, if we were born into the world and our very first experience was trauma, you know, it's unlikely that, you know,
we would have flourished in the way that we have.
One of the ways that I think about trauma in case it's helpful is looking at trauma as arising out of discontinuity.
So when I am having experiences in the world to the degree that one facet of my experience following another is discontinuous,
it's going to be harder for me to integrate.
Right.
So if I'm just going along in the world and, you know, everything's kind of hunky dory and then something happens that's unexpected
or that, you know, as we'll say in the trauma field, something that's too big, too much, too fast,
that's difficult for the psyche to really make sense of.
And so I really think that looking at these dynamics of discontinuity are key to understanding when we get stuck in a loop
that, you know, results in the symptoms that we call trauma.
So birth, you know, is one of these things that has discontinuity built into it.
So we have this like nine month period of time where we're in the womb and everything is dark and quiet.
You know, we hear the whew, the muted, you know, reverby kind of sounds from the outside world.
And it's, you know, it's cozy and warm in there.
You know, it's, we now climb into these like flotation tanks, you know, to try to rediscover a quality of how delightful that is.
And then we come into the external world.
And, you know, many of us in the modern situation do that in hospitals.
So we come out into a place from that cozy, dark little cave into a room that's cold, that's incredibly bright,
that's very, very loud, that's filled with people that have a lot of frenetic energy because they're worried about how this thing could go wrong and lawsuits and all this stuff.
And, you know, some of those things are good.
We want our hospitals to be bright so that docs can see what they're doing.
You know, we want them to be cooler so that, you know, there's not the proliferation of microbes that could kill us and all that.
But it's an incredibly discontinuous experience, I think.
And, you know, it wasn't too long ago that, you know, we were literally slapped upon entering the world.
You know, these, these male doctors developed this notion that like, well, the first thing you got to do when they show up is, you know, you got to get them breathing.
You know, the body just doesn't know how to breathe without our intervention.
And so, I mean, it's just, you know, the ultimate discontinuity and, you know, sometimes a lack of ability to bond with the mother, you know, right after the birth.
If you contrast that with earth-based cultures, you know, you'll often see the birth taking place in a darkened hut, you know, that's kept warm,
where there is, you know, elders, you know, women who have, who have, you know, gone through this process before.
And, you know, sometimes low singing and you're born into something that more closely approximates what you've just been experiencing.
And you're immediately united with mother's body, you know, which you've become intimately familiar with.
And you get to make this entry that I think allows for more of a sense of continuity, more of a sense of, of wholeness.
You know, then you would have a lot of, of incredibly close contact with the mother's body and other bodies.
You know, and there's those just startling statistics that I think some part of my psyche has blocked the actual numbers.
You know, like I've thought, okay, this would be a really good little factoid to carry.
But it's maybe just too sad to, to kind of stay in contact with.
But, you know, it's something like it when they, when they measured with the, the Hadza, you know, it was like for infants, it was over 90, maybe 95% of the time,
they were in direct physical contact with another human form.
And in the modern Western world, you know, some studies indicate something like, and again, I'm fudging the numbers a little bit, but something like 10%.
Right.
So we're spending a ton of time in strollers, in cribs, in, you know, funny little chairs with plastic doodads, you know, hanging in front of us.
And I think that that is just bewildering for our organism.
Yeah.
Like we really need that, that connection, the, the smells, the, the, the warmth, you know, and all the ways that that facilitates co-regulation.
You know, one of the things that we look at a lot in the traumatology world is this notion of how physical organisms co-regulate.
And there's a whole science around, which I think you might have spoken to on a previous episode, what's called biological synchrony.
You know, the ways that organisms, when in proximity to each other, begin to spontaneously synchronize.
Right.
And it's barely an overstatement to say that almost any variable they throw at this experimental paradigm is shown to synchronize.
So we're just like synchrony machines.
You know, we, we, we get into, into proximity with, with someone else in the literature.
They use this fancy term con specifics, you know, other interaction partners and, and, and our bodies without us having to, you know, say or, or do anything to make it happen.
They begin to come into alignment with each other.
And so heart rate will synchronize, respiration will synchronize, walking pace, rate of speech, level of prosody in the voice, you know, how we use our voice to express emotion in a, in a way that doesn't relate to the words that we're saying.
All of those things and so many more, you know, brainwave patterns, the activation of different brain regions, you know, all of it comes into alignment.
And so without that, as little ones, we're not getting the basic biological training for resilience, you know, for activation and deactivation and, you know, being able to cycle out of arousal into settling and, and develop those capacities.
And so I think often not having gone through co-regulation, we have a difficult time getting to self-regulation, you know, which we talked a little bit last time.
There's so many more and you know, I'm, I'm at risk of, of turning the whole episode into this.
You know, like you mentioned on another episode before, the permissive parenting that you often see in hunter-gatherer groups, you know, that there's not this enforced socialization into cultural mores that I think on some level our organism knows are wrong.
And what you see is a slow and steady movement towards adulthood and towards developing adult capacities that are born out of an authentic yearning to be a part of the group.
Yeah. Do you get a sense? So, I mean, this like the, the early childhood infancy, like close maternal contact and other kinds of contact thing is one of those things that seems like it's been fairly rigorously established both through comparative, you know, cultural studies like hunter-gatherers versus other types of societies.
And also like on the cross species level, you know, there's all this, there's all this evidence that depriving other, other old world monkeys and apes of maternal contact is completely psychologically debilitating.
And so there's, you know, I know there's like attachment theory, John Bulby and all that, which was like really well established.
I mean, I think he wrote, he started writing that stuff in the 60s.
Is it your observation? So for me, this has always been one of the most just like scathing indictments of the society we live in, like in its absolute fundaments, you know, just seem utterly wrong and utterly antithetical to the nature that we possess.
Is it something that, but I don't really hear specialists necessarily talk about it, including like trauma therapists that I've interacted with and other disciplines and stuff like that.
Is it your sense that this is something in kind of the professional landscape of, I guess, not just like psychotherapy, but people who are assessing human behavior from kind of like a lot of different angles and human health.
Is this like talked about much, is this acknowledged as like a core kind of like problem that we're all grappling with the reverberations of?
I don't know that I would say it is, you know, and it's just one of those things that continues to surprise me, you know.
I feel like I should tell our listeners that we're actually on screen with each other right now, like we're seeing each other and this is funny.
Yeah, we're exchanging cues. And there's this funny thing that I noticed last time and this time where there's certain certain moments where we talk about like really horrific stuff and we chuckle.
And it's just like, it's like having held the awareness of these things for so long, you know, there's a certain like you just can't but laugh at it, you know, at a certain point.
But it's truly devastating. You know, it's devastating. It's devastating to who we are. We're not made for this.
And so, you know, though I think I've developed a certain capacity for a kind of gallows humor, you know, it's also, you know, I try not to like lose connection with, you know, when I see a baby and, you know, just to remain, you know,
as a member, this isn't what our organism expects and it's not what we need, you know, and so.
But yeah, I think by and large the awareness of that goes mostly unnoticed, you know, and there's sort of an expectation that children should be able to adjust, you know, to this world.
You know, there's just just to just to kind of lay a couple of them out on the table, you know, we should probably also name, you know, that nursing on demand is another consistent feature that, you know, generally it's the baby that that terminates the
nursing relationship, you know, co-sleeping, you know, exposure to a wide range of age groups.
You know, it's I think a very perverse thing about the modern world that we tend to segregate children into these highly specific, you know, one to two year age windows.
And so, you know, it's been speculated that children who have access to a number of different, you know, who have access to children with different ages get a whole bunch of examples of how to be a human.
You know, here's this eight year old that's showing me what, you know, what being an eight year old is, and here's this 10 year old and 12 year old and we consistently play together and I'm tagging along, you know, sort of following them.
And it's not just a child looking to adults to try to figure out what being a human is. It's being able to see this whole range of development and to, you know, play with different capacities at different times.
You know, another huge one is access to other entities, animals and, you know, a vibrant plethora of plants, you know, that like just being in nature and getting to play at seeing how other species do this whole life thing.
You know, that's a really huge missing piece for especially a lot of urban children, but, you know, even rural, you know, our access to wild nature is really shrinking and, you know, I don't know.
I think one would be hard pressed to find a whole lot of ways in which the modern situation doesn't differ from the conditions that our species, you know, comfortably lived within for hundreds of thousands or millions of years depending on, you know, how you think about that.
Yeah, it seems to me like there are elements of that model of childhood that can kind of be recaptured on some level in some of the social situations that exist in the modern world.
Like, I definitely the, when I read stuff about the tendency of kids to essentially kind of take on some of the supervisory and instructive roles for like other kids who are maybe just a couple years younger than them.
That definitely really sounded familiar to me from all the like, like just kind of like gangs of impoverished children that I was around when I was a child and how yeah, there would be like an eight year old like really showing a five year old how to like deal with life.
You know, and it's like something that actually seems really class bound to a pretty large extent like not something I see as many middle class children and rich children doing but then my sense is that there are really core elements of the hunter gather childhood.
Like, I guess just that basic reality that there is not a lot of like formal instruction or discipline, but that the kid is able to observe what is happening around it and develop really rapidly into like a super competent being in a lot of ways like way.
I mean, as much as there aren't as many responsibilities like imposed on children, often like hunter gather children are like doing a bunch of their own food gathering and hunting at like really young ages.
And these like some of these elements seem like they would basically be borderline impossible to recapitulate in our in our current society.
Like I don't really know how they would work. I don't know how a child would like gain a full suit of competencies in this society without some.
Do you have thoughts about that about like to what extent this can be emulated, you know, like I feel like we can have a paleo diet in a modern society and it might be like a decent approximation like we could actually do that.
But I just don't know. Does that question make sense?
Yeah, absolutely. I so much of it, I think depends on the group. Yeah.
You know, and that's where that's where I think, you know, we're going to be really missing something.
Right.
You know, with it with a diet, you know, that can be a very individualized thing, you know, and you can make decisions about what particular foods you put into this particular body.
And in that, you know, make a decision to prioritize something that more closely approximates, you know, what what what our bodies are designed for.
But there's this other thing that our bodies are designed for that we can't just manufacture or or necessarily choose, which is immersion in an incredibly tight knit and intimate group of other humans.
Yeah.
A very salient feature of hunter gatherer life is that people spend relatively little time alone.
Right.
And you know, you roam the landscape with, you know, a group of roughly 25 to 50 other individuals with whom you are bonded, you know, by DNA, you know, you're you're committed to each other because you share a genetic heritage or there's been some way in which
other individuals have come in via ceremonial rights, you know, that cement those social bonds.
You know, you're you're surrounded by people who all know your name and all know the special stories about you and the things that you have made you who you are and who your parents are and your grandparents.
And, you know, it's, it's, it's something that that I think we're all starving for, you know, in one way or another.
And, and that's, you know, that's this piece that that, you know, is going to impact us in childhood, certainly, you know, I think throughout the lifespan.
But, you know, unless you're lucky enough to, you know, find those, those, you know, hordes of children that come together to, you know, protect each other and, and, you know, might band together, you know, to, to, you know, find ways to thrive in adverse conditions.
You know, there's just not a whole lot of that on offer.
Yeah, no, it really seems like it. I would not have like clear prescriptive advice if somebody living in like a nice neighborhood in Seattle was like, I want to raise my children, according to the hunter gatherer model.
I don't know what to tell you about that.
Right, right. Because we've got, you know, we've got some ideas about, you know, you can, you can bring back, you know, nursing, you know, and you can, you know, you can baby wearing and, you know, there's things can do.
But so much of that, you know, have gone on this journey, you know, within my own family, you know, someone that falls on, on mom, you know, in the modern contact, you know, let's say primary caregiver, and that's not sustainable.
It's too much, you know, that's a, that's a huge part of the hunter gatherer parenting context is what, you know, Sarah called aloe parents, you know, these other community members, grandparents, these other individuals that are like,
really committed to these little ones, you know, as much in some cases as the primary parent. And, you know, it really lightens the load on on the parents and, and, you know, so, so yeah, we've we've got that piece a little bit but then without, you know, the coherent social group, you know, it's it's a little it's a little
little challenging, I think.
Sure. Yeah, yeah, which definitely is a lot of people's memories of feedback loop I think because a lot of people's memories of childhood and their interaction with their parents are interactions with people who were so exhausted that at best they were kind of distant and at worst they were, you know,
monsters or whatever it's like.
I mean, it seems, it seems like hot to me like I mean in the conversations that I've had in throughout my life different like romantic partners and stuff about having kids. I'm just like, you know, like, if it's just us to ultimately like it just sounds so hard, it sounds so hard.
Yeah, it's, it's, you know, again, it's a situation where the world isn't built for success. You know, this, this world that we're in doesn't doesn't prime for success. You know, and, and yeah, you know, I've, you know, I was just recently teaching my child long division.
Okay, yeah. You know, and like, for one thing, I have no business being a math teacher. I've discovered is like, like, wait, what's the what's the numerator and what's the you know, it's just outside my, my, my capacities.
But you know, the whole time it was like, this child should be learning snares right now. You know, like, like, like, you know, this child should be learning plant ID. And you know, I mean, that child does know more than I do actually about plant ID, which is really quite, quite cool.
But, you know, there's just like, there's just no way around it. You know, we're in this fun as parents, I think we're in this funny situation of trying to simultaneously equip our children with the capacities to succeed in the world that's been built.
But also some degree of familiarity and comfort with the world that is in the world that we hope to in some way, you know, return back to at some point, you know, hopefully as part of a soft landing, you know, where we re enter some kind of partnership with nature voluntarily.
And it's a tricky business, you know, to know how to how to negotiate that.
Yeah, yeah, I can only imagine. Yeah.
Okay, so we go through childhood. And then we get into adolescence, which is another super fun time in our society.
And one thing that really struck me, I guess I'm gonna, yeah, I'm going to descend into personal anecdote here for a second, which is like I had when I was an adolescent heard some like vague talk about how lots of cultures have initiation rituals and they're super important and like, we lack for something because we don't.
And I kind of, you know, I mean, I just didn't really have an opinion, but I'd say I like borderline disregarded those sort of like vague claims that I heard.
And then when I was 16 years old, I decided to like strike out on my own and hop trains alone and just be like totally alone in the world and like, you know, like completely dependent on myself for survival.
And somewhere after a couple months of that, I had this experience where I was, you know, I was like really clear that something was happening for me psychologically.
That was like analogous to or paralleled the initiation rituals that characterize so many, you know, societies or it's like, you got to go out on your own, you got to like face all the fear there is in the world, you got to develop the sense of great self reliance.
And honestly, throughout my life, subsequently, I've been really aware that that is not that the experience that I had is not an experience that everybody has.
And I'm pretty sure that it does something to people.
I mean, do you think that our lack of initiation rituals has a psychological reverberance throughout adulthood or like our attempt to get to adulthood or whatever it is we're doing?
Oh, absolutely. In some ways, it's potentially a deterministic, you know, prohibition on really attaining mature consciousness.
I mean, you know, again, I might think about continuity here, you know, the incredible angst of adolescence is in part, I think the psyche's negotiation of moving from childhood status to adult status.
And just what a massive shift that is, you know, in terms of your sense of belonging and, you know, identity and all of that and, you know, sane cultures developed ways to ferry children through that process so that it was not so terribly discontinuous.
And there would be, you know, processes that facilitated making that journey in a way that didn't fragment the psyche.
And so, you know, I really think there is a cost, you know, and I see so much of the foibles of my youth as failed attempts at self initiation.
Right. Yeah. It really seems that's a model that I've applied to a lot of behavior I've seen in myself, my peers, and just people around me and it really does make a lot of sense.
It seems like a lot of people are searching for some initiation ritual.
It kind of seems like a lot of behavior that people are appalled by in adolescence is that on some level, like a lot of the dangerous behavior and stuff like that.
Right. You know, I think about your train hopping adventure of which I've, you know, had some of my own and it's like, it's so analogous.
I mean, you know, in many cultures, what happens for the adolescent is they are with a whole lot of care and supervision invited to go off on their own.
Right.
And they have been, you know, as we've talked about, they have had this experience of incredibly intimate connection and care, you know, through those first years of life in which it's so important, you know, that we have regular consistent access to bigger, more competent humans that are, you know, absolutely dedicated to us.
To taking care of us. And then, you know, there's this moment where it's like, okay, and now go off on your own.
Yeah.
And so those ways that you have been kind of fused with, you know, maybe particular caregivers or a sense of, you know, your identity being more of a group identity that's shared amongst all of the people.
You now go off on your own to develop a wider connection.
Right.
So like Paul Shepard, who I mentioned last time, you know, he has this notion of, you know, going through a sense that, you know, our identity going through a process of graduation into a sense of connection with and participation in wider and wider spheres.
Yeah.
You know, so at first it might just be, I think, what he called the mother matrix, you know, where there's this, you know, largely I think an undifferentiated experience of biological continuity.
And then we're part of the group. And then the group facilitates for us this opportunity to go out and discover our connection to this whole wide world that we're a part of.
And, you know, then also, you know, metaphysical entities, you know, ancestors, spiritual forces, other aspects of life that we can feel a sense of reliance on and belonging to, you know, throughout the course of our lifespan.
You know, yeah, without that, you know, we're, I think, you know, often stuck in a more adolescent kind of consciousness, which is that, you know, that very concrete, like, you know, what are these objects and how can I manipulate them?
And, you know, what is the way that I win, you know, in the world?
And that's, I think, what we see largely in our world today is, you know, adults who were never able to quite make that step that would have facilitated, you know, what we would think of as becoming a true elder and are stuck in that kind of adolescent or sometimes even earlier kind of consciousness.
Yeah, it seems like that has a lot to do with both what we call empathy, and what we call like ecological values or whatever the sense that as we progress through life, and as we develop in particular, we under ancestral conditions would be developing
like expanding spheres of consciousness, we would see ourselves as part of bigger and bigger configurations of reality, like, you know, part of a network of more and more beings.
And it seems like the kind of like the deficit of both those things, the deficit of empathy in our culture and the shocking deficit of any kind of like sensibility about the world, like belonging to the world.
It would seem like they probably do kind of result from a thwarted developmental process to some extent.
For sure. I mean, you know, Shepherd again, you know, has said that rather than living in a world of just an incredible profusion of other species, you know, where there's just, you know, untold numbers of other beings to come to know and to experience.
And their expression and, you know, unique unfolding in the world.
We live as modern people in a world of humans and human created artifacts.
Yeah.
And he says that that drives us mad. And I'm inclined to agree, you know, to at least, you know, in a certain fundamental sense.
And yes, we, you know, we, we often I think lack a sense of connection, which I believe opens up into a sense of empathic concern.
And additionally, you know, this is maybe somewhere where we could reflect back on, you know, the somatic dimension of the work that I do.
Yeah.
You know, talking about embodiment, I believe that it's only through really feeling and knowing ourselves that we truly can develop a more mature empathic awareness.
You know, so, so much of, of what we call empathy, you know, fellow feeling or, you know, being able to put ourselves in someone else's shoes.
I think that arises spontaneously out of our experience of ourselves.
You know, so there's the mirror neurons piece, you know, that's a part of this, the proven capacity of many of the neurons in our motor cortex to fire not just when we are in movement, but when we observe others making those movements.
Yeah.
So it's in a way our brain seems to be prepared for this.
I also think it's, it's, it's worth noting that children generally events targeted helping behaviors where you, you anticipate the needs or desires of another and try to meet those around the same age that they will start to pass the mirror
self-recognition test.
Okay.
You know, so like it would, it would appear that it's, it's as we come to understand ourselves, we also understand the other.
Right.
And, you know, similarly, there's a brain region called the insula, the insular cortex.
Insula seems to be quite involved in what's called interoception.
So feeling the inside of our bodies.
Yeah.
And we notice a feeling that's inside of us when we're in our somatic experience.
The insula lights up on brain scans and the insula also seems to be centrally involved in empathy.
So it's entirely possible that as we come to feel ourselves more to be more connected to our internal experience, we also are going to be more connected with others.
As we are embodied, we're also more empathic.
And, you know, I just think of all of these as aspects of natural development that have been truncated.
And if I could just go on a little aside here, I just, I want, I want to reflect on something which is that fundamentally we don't exactly know what was happening in prehistory.
Right.
But we can't know.
And, you know, I think people like yourself and myself, you know, we were avid consumers of anthropological literature and, you know, archeological data and things that, you know, do try to tell a story about that.
But really, you know, we just don't know.
It's a screen that we're never going to be able to see through and which invites a whole lot of projection, you know, because you can't exactly know, you know.
And I think there's good cause to make inferences like the ones that we're making.
But I think it's especially important for us to really contend with this fact because what that leaves us with is a situation in which our fundamental assumptions about the human organism and what we could call human nature are going to cause us to project certain things onto that screen.
Yeah.
And this is why I'm so glad that, you know, you're doing the work that you're doing and there's others out there, you know, really marinating in these questions because so much of the narrative of human nature that we have been given, that we've been conditioned into, that we have inherited is that humans are fundamentally bad.
Right.
You know, that we were a fallen creature and some metaphysical systems, or, you know, we're just this incredibly selfish, self driven organism, you know, that has selfish genes and, and, you know, is involved in the survival of the fittest, you know, like desperate effort to push everything else down so that we can succeed.
And, you know, again, I think, you know, when we look at the data that is available, a really different picture starts to emerge. And, and also, you know, if these truly were the, the, our whole suite of psychological and behavioral capacities, you know, the thing just would not have worked.
Yeah. Yeah. No, I am acutely aware that there is a huge dimension of storytelling in all of these, in all of these like anthropological narratives, and that it really does like they're hugely value laden and you almost just can't avoid that.
And you have to like really, I, you know, I don't know, like, I guess be like rigorous with yourself and scrutinize the inclinations, like one is bringing one's own self into the analytical picture.
But yeah, I actually, I don't know, just a couple of weeks ago, I was having this conversation with somebody about egalitarianism versus hierarchy and hunter gatherer societies, and the kind of like the debates that have existed around that for years, you know.
And I wondered if I was like, well, you know, maybe, maybe there's been some resolution, maybe, you know, maybe, maybe we're approaching a consensus of some kind or another.
And I got ahold of a literature review that was written last year, 2020, about hunter gatherers. It's literally like, it's literally like two adjacent sentences that are like, there's strong evidence that hunter gatherer societies were extremely egalitarian.
However, some authors also suggest that hunter gatherer societies were extremely hierarchical, you know, like, okay, no, we're still grappling with our own like deep seated values and assumptions and whatever, you know.
Right.
Right.
Yeah, confirmation bias is a thing.
It's, it's a thing.
I'm touching on another aspect. I mean, I think that this transcends out of lessons per se, but since we were talking about that, it's a it's a good point to to touch on it, which is, I think I see, I see kind of like a multifaceted.
I'm not sure how to concisely articulate it, but it does seem that modern societies both present us with a whole lot of certain types of trauma that evolution didn't really anticipate, you know, difficulty psychological distress, but also in a way seem to deprive us of some crucial
differences of like other types of adversity and navigating adversity that are good for us and that build resilience right this is like another way we could think of adolescence like initiation ceremonies is from everything I've read they sound scary, you know, they sound like they sound
like a difficult thing to endure on some level but also that that difficult experience catalyzes like resilience and it seems like we are modern societies are really painful and difficult but we're also just to just to use like really simple colloquial terminology
like we don't seem quite as tough as people like really appear to have been throughout a lot of our of our history and you said you think you think that's true also do you think there's ways we're also kind of weirdly deprived of forms of like stress or adversity that are actually
kind of good for us. I do. Yeah. And you know, in another interesting place where you come across these these two just wildly diverging perspectives, yeah, that seem irreconcilable relates to child rearing, you know, because it's clear that something has
gone awry, you know, children having, you know, increasing levels of mental health disorders and those are coming earlier and earlier and, you know, there's there's some way in which we're clearly not delivering the experience of childhood that kids need to be saying healthy and whole.
And I've been really interested to note that there's these two different interpretations for that. One is that our children are too stressed, like the modern world is just too stressful, too many demands things are going too fast, we put them in too many extracurricular activities there's just there's there's too much stress.
Other people, they're getting coddled, right? They're not exposed to the kind of stuff that, you know, made me as strong as I am we're, you know, we're, we're not given them enough challenge. And it's like, how do how is it that we live in a world where there's there's so there's such a lack of a consensus
reality that, you know, you have these two things coming together. I think to some extent both are true, though, as you're saying, yeah, you know, it's like they're exposed to a lot of stress, but it's the wrong kind of stress. Like one of the things that I'll say in our training is that our and I mentioned this, I think a little bit last time.
Our organism is like, incredibly well designed for a transient stress response. You know, something happens, it stimulates my system. Immediately, my organism goes into this, this, this global response, where all of these physiological variables get turned up, and I am ready to go.
You know, there's, there's, there's, there's, I've become to some extent, you know, now with superpowers, I have superpowers now. And, and then really well designed to settle once, you know, the threat or novelty or adversity has passed.
What our organism is not well designed for is chronic stress. Consistent, low levels of agitation about situations that we cannot resolve, you know, where in some way the threat never passes. Going to school is a perfect example of chronic stress.
Both in the expectations that we face as students, also in the, the, the brutality of the social milieu, you know, the, the, you know, especially for those of us that might have been in some way, you know, not at the very center of the, the social, the social world.
And, you know, that kind of constant, constant stress really eats away at our body. You know, I mean, it, it, it on a basic physiological level, you know, at one of the little things that I'll sometimes tell my clients when I'm trying to encourage them to, to cultivate lives that are less stressful.
Cortisol, one of our hormones that can be a part of a stress response. One of the things that cortisol will do in the body is break down muscle tissue into its amino acid constituent elements to then send those amino acids to the liver to get converted into sugars to power our stress response.
So those sugars can either get sent to the brain to help to facilitate, you know, some sort of strategizing of how we're going to deal with this threat or sent to the large muscle groups that power our fight or flight response.
You know, the body will literally eat itself to deal with short term stressors. And it's wonderful that we have that, you know, the reason why we're here is because our ancestors were able to get away from the saber toothed tiger, you know, or whatever, owing to that transient stress response.
But the consistent low level stress, you know, when those physiological mechanisms don't get a break, you know, when there's, when we're, you know, you know, for me, it's email, like I get an email.
And I'll just ruminate on that, that freaking email all day and I'll write all kinds of different responses in my head and I'm, you know, I'm just figuring out how I'm going to deal with this situation.
And, and all the while my poor body is like, okay, something's wrong, something's wrong. And it's, you know, it's, it's in this, it's in this, this stress response, like, over time that breaks down our tissues and leaves us vulnerable to chronic disease.
At the same time, if we don't have exposure to novelty and to threat, we never develop resilience. Our system never learns that rhythmic fluctuation between arousal and settling that's just so important for, you know, functioning well and being healthy.
Yeah, I agree. It seems like it is, it's a, it's a beautiful case study in like the weird binaries that people love to construct and the like values that will like choose that, like, kind of like compel them to go on one binary path or the other with this stuff where it's like, you know, we could be talking about the same kid.
And the kid is like, you know, was like placed in Japanese and violin lessons when they were like five and they're expected to do really good because it'll show up on their transcripts when they try to get into like an Ivy League school or whatever.
But they're also not allowed to like go past like the end of the block because, you know, like they might skin their knee or whatever, you know, it's like, so you get to choose like is the kid being mercilessly subjected to like horrendous, you know, stress and like a ceaseless litany of
horrors or is the kid being like coddled and you know, and people really like, I don't know, like they mostly don't want to talk about these dimensions in any kind of like synthesis or conjunction.
They're like, well, I'll just focus on one aspect of the situation.
And I'll like, you know, go and make value statement about it or whatever.
Right. And all the while, all of that cogitating and theorizing is totally disconnected from this underlying question that we're exploring of is this environment the environment that the human organism needs to be successful.
Right. And it seems like that gets into a sort of like a broader, there's like the, you know, acute stressors versus chronic stressors element of it.
But then it's just like the whole question of like both like pace of life, but also rhythm of life in our society and what that does to people.
I guess just like, you know, like one thing that I was really struck by I recently reread the Germania of Tacitus, you know, so he's describing Germanic tribes sometime around when there was still a Roman Empire.
And then I was also reading a book about the Comanche and very, very parallel descriptions where the more like civilized commentators and observers would be like almost appalled by how lazy they found these people, you know, like they just sit around
like feasting and making love and like telling stories around a fire for like months at a time, you know, and you like they kind of can't disguise the contempt in their voices.
You know, but then they'll be like, but then sometimes it's like they spring into action and they're super human, you know, like they like they can like ride longer than we can and they need less, you know, like whatever, like, and they're acknowledging this duality and it seems like it seems like
our pace of life is is not that it's like we never get those times when it's like it's just time to feast and hang out and tell stories for like two months, you know, and now it's time to go be like a really serious badass.
And and that seems like it's just kind of wearing us all down.
Yeah.
Yeah, honestly, I don't think I need to add anything to that because, you know, you basically spell that out just just to say that there's lots of other lots of other accounts like that, and also accounts of
Explorers and anthropologists speaking to members of Earth based cultures and their descriptions of like colonizers, you know, where they'll say things like, like, they just seem hungry.
You know, or there's there's there's something in their eyes that's like they're, you know, they're crazed, you know, or that that famous quote from Cortez, you know, we, we Spaniards have a sickness of the heart only gold can cure.
Oh, God, you know, it's like, yeah, you know, like a rare colonizer who had some degree of, you know, self insight, I guess.
But, you know, that that it's it's clear that there's there's some kind of itch that drives this speed and intensity that we don't seem to be able to scratch, you know, it's a to do list that never we never get to the end of.
And, you know, people toil their entire lives and get to the end and say, boy, you know, was was that the life that I was supposed to be, you know, leading that whole time.
Um, I heard you mentioned in a talk and I wanted to ask you more about it.
You feel like there are some significant psychological reverberations for us from the fact that we don't really know how to do most of the things that are done in our society that we don't have like kind of basic agency or competencies to like take care of ourselves and all the different like to meet all our needs.
I do. I mean, I think that one of the interesting facets of hunter-gatherer life is that you lived in this incredibly close communion with other individuals and you knew everything that you needed to know to survive.
You know, there's there's been, you know, in the in the literature that is sometimes called anarcho primitivism or an anti civilization discourse.
You know, there's been a critique of this quality of modern life that is division of labor.
You know, whereas complex societies become more complex, certain individuals are tasked with taking care of particular aspects of that.
And though it's it's likely that some extent that to some extent this was happening in our ancestral conditions as well.
You know, if I'm somebody who's really drawn to crafting and basketry, you know, it's likely that I would have focused on that.
But generally when when when people are, you know, contacted and and, you know, asked to describe their lives, it's like everybody knows a little bit about everything.
And and I think that that would have conferred an enormous amount of psychological stability.
You know, this knowledge that like there's all these people around and I'm really glad because I want them to be around.
I'm not like scared of everything and like, you know, feel like, oh gosh, they have to be around because I would die if they weren't around necessarily.
I want them around.
But if something were to happen where I got separated from the group, I would be able to at least give it a go to make it on my own.
Because I know how to do the things that humans need to be able to do to survive.
And sometimes when I'm giving these talks, you know, I'll I'll contrast that with my own life.
You know, where if a if a critical piece of infrastructure in my life breaks down, like, let's say the fridge.
If the fridge breaks down, I have no idea what to do.
No idea.
And I could literally die because I do that thing, you know, and it's like, there's so many things like that.
You know, our culture right now, so much of the art has this this catastrophic quality to it.
You know, everybody seems so obsessed with with collapse, you know, everybody's marooned on islands and trying to survive, you know, and all of these incredible catastrophes, you know, befall the world and people try to make make do.
And I think that that speaks to this underlying knowledge that without all of this infrastructure and all of these incredibly complex systems in place, I don't know how to survive.
Yeah.
It's like I'm utterly dependent on this civilization to meet my basic needs for survival.
And it's a civilization that at the same time I know is kind of destroying everything.
Yeah, I was blown away.
I can't remember if I've ever talked about this on the podcast before or not, but I read like a quantitative study of this cultural fixation on collapse where some that guy Mike Davis wrote a book where he indexed every single time that Los Angeles had been destroyed in a major motion picture.
And it's just like, it's like hundreds. And you know, he develops like a whole taxonomy, you know, destruction by zombie destruction by plague or whatever.
And I mean, it's just like there's like hundreds and hundreds of movies where like the basic social fabric of Los Angeles collapses for one reason or another.
And yeah, it does. It seems like it speaks to some like there must just be some like pretty ubiquitous chronic anxiety about like kind of the inherent precarity of this thing we've built.
If we want to see that many movies.
It never gets old because that's where all the filmmakers live, right?
So that is part of it.
Yeah, they're just constantly imagining what could happen.
It's LA and New York. Those are the cities that really just get it over and over again.
Well, yeah. I mean, that's, you know, without, you know, going too far into this, because I know that it's not really what we're focused on.
But I think that that's built in, you know, I mean, a fundamental feature of civilization is a dependence on agriculture.
And agriculture is one of the most unstable precarious very precarious.
You know, it's like, you know, a blight could come.
And then all of a sudden, everybody, nobody has food.
You know, when you're dependent on a small number of crops, highly specialized, it's a, it's a, it's a scary thing.
And that that I think, again, is one of those underlying chronic stressors that when you lived in a world of abundant food resources and, you know,
and a knowledge of taxonomy and animal migrations and, you know, a deep knowledge of the land and how it, how it gave us these gifts of food,
you know, that would have been less of a, less of a stressor.
Let me just, I just have a couple more questions that are kind of, I don't know, orienting towards like responses we can take in the modern world
through the way the modern world afflicts us.
But before I transition there, I guess let me just ask, is there anything else we haven't covered that you feel is like particularly fundamental, responsive to the broad question,
like how do our modern societies traumatize us and or impede our ability to recover from trauma?
You know, one of the things that I think about a lot, you know, is as I've talked about and alluded to here, I tend to think there's a lot of different ways that the modern situation fails to minister to our needs.
One of the ones that I have sometimes said is potentially the very worst is that we don't get to be around babies.
You know, one of the things that seems like a pretty hardwired thing for us, although I have come across people who maybe don't have it as much, is this delight in seeing little things, immature beings.
You know, it does something to us. It lights us up and it evokes this caretaking impulse.
And you know, that's one of the things that we see in hunter-gatherer groups where infants are in close connection with other bodies a lot of the time, is those children are just delighted in.
And, you know, as the baby is handed around from person to person, they get to do their, like, delighting and they, you know, toss the kid up in the air and, you know, carry it around and, you know, the adolescents play at being parents.
And, you know, the baby is just, like, exposed to this constant stream of what we should probably just call love.
And, you know, that arises spontaneously out of that delight.
And so not being in a social group where we're consistently with babies, you know, I think that that really does something to us.
I notice when I'm on the street and I, you know, I see a baby, I'm, like, craning my neck to try to get a view of, you know, the, you know, through the stroller or the baby carrier or whatever, you know.
And I really wonder about, you know, the lack of that, you know, the lack of this activity as aloe parents and being a part of the growth and maturation of others around us, you know, really consistently.
No, that makes a lot of sense, yeah. Yeah, that's interesting.
Okay, so yeah, my final questions are kind of about ways that we can try to grapple with the situation.
And, you know, I guess the big one, we only really touched on it a little bit in this discussion.
But it's, I think it's like, it's one of those things that's so fundamental that everybody knows that the degree of isolation we're experiencing is really, really, really bad for us.
Whatever kind of theories people have about society in the world, that's something that most of us just intuitively understand.
And I wonder if you have a sense of how, I mean, basically, this is like a truly hard question.
I don't expect you to have like a decisive and great answer, but like how we can, how people who are struggling with trauma or are traumatized by isolation itself can overcome isolation enough to kind of like begin a healing process.
Sometimes it's through connecting with a practitioner.
Yeah, I would tend to think that the specialization and the formality of, you know, the therapist-client relationship is not something that would be reflected in an ancestral situation.
And it seems to be a pretty, pretty serviceable work around in many regards for, you know, the modern situation.
So, you know, I think that, you know, I will sometimes act as that point of connection for traumatized individuals for a period of time.
But, you know, one of the things that I'm doing as a practitioner is trying to as quickly and unobtrusively as I can work myself out of a job.
You know, I don't want people that have to keep coming back to me week after week for decades, you know, as a kind of a, you know, a crutch to make it through daily life.
You know, I want to be able to provide a healing environment that can support them to, you know, come back into their own flourishing to, you know, whatever extent that they can.
But I'm always asking my clients about other relationships in their life.
Yeah.
You know, like I don't want to just focus on the relationship that I have with a particular person I'm working with.
I'm always asking them, you know, how it's going with other figures in their life if they've been able to reach out and make connections with other people and environments where they find themselves consistently.
And I'm priming for people to have more connection.
You know, I think at some point we're going to have to really work at the creation of small scale cohesive social groups.
Right.
I don't exactly know, you know, how this is going to go, but you know, to be a part of a pod is, I think, a need that we have.
And, you know, not that there it would be within that a particular expectation of who you are, you know, I think a wide array of different psychological predispositions can serve a group's flourishing.
But the way that so many people just inherently do not experience themselves as part of something, something else is disastrous, you know, psychologically speaking.
Yeah. Relatedly, do you see, I'll preface it with not that I expect you to register anything about this in particular, but when I see a riot happening,
I'm not really clear what purpose it has except for a psychological one.
But sometimes I quip about the healing power of riots.
Sometimes I'm like, well, the one thing I know is happening is that people are, you know, experiencing like a sense of defiance that is probably like in sort of like collective cohesion that's probably good for them on some level.
But like, do you see collective behavioral phenomena outside of like the realm of explicit like therapy per se that I guess has like do you see like forms of collective behavioral phenomena that are accessible that people are doing or very conceivably could be doing that would facilitate some of the healing processes that you do in your work?
Potentially. I might maybe depends on the riot, but I might think of some of these things as again, failed initiation rights.
So while I think it is true that those very vibrant experiences of shared purpose and the breaking of taboos and the manifesting of my life energy that can be healing and restorative in some way, that's often occurring without any kind of container.
You know, there's not an elder that's there that's creating the context for this. There's not a ritual that's undertaken beforehand and knowledge of a closing ritual that will leave us back into, you know, our social fabric in some meaningful way.
You know, that those those explosions of, you know, sort of primordial energy, I think serve a necessary psychic function. But the question of whether it gets us to healing or not, I think is something to be curious about.
Yeah, I agree. Yeah, I mean, that that makes sense. I definitely don't feel like I feel like there's clearly exactly like you said, like clearly a need being met by things like riots and also very clearly something missing.
Well, anything we haven't covered that we should cover in this discussion.
I don't I don't believe so. It's it's been it's been a harrowing tour through through some of the ways in which, you know, we could think our developmental process, you know, might not support the best outcomes.
But I really believe that in thinking about these things and beginning to reckon with them, we open up these different possibilities. So I'm just glad to get to participate in that with you.
Yeah, it's been a great discussion. I really enjoyed it.
Thanks.
Thank you.
All of these things are designed to fight in a month.