Title: Heal Like an Animal Interview With Joshua Sylvae pt 1
Episode #: 21
Episode ID: 7175812
Source: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/7175812-heal-like-an-animal-interview-with-joshua-sylvae-pt-1.mp3
------------------------------------------------------------

=== EPISODE METADATA ===
Generated: 2026-01-12 01:02:07
Episode ID: 7175812
MP3 File: 7175812-heal-like-an-animal-interview-with-joshua-sylvae-pt-1.mp3
Title: Untitled Episode
Podcast/Artist: Against the Internet
Album/Series: Fight Like An Animal
Source URL: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/7175812-heal-like-an-animal-interview-with-joshua-sylvae-pt-1.mp3
========================
Now, in this experiment, this is the apparatus we use that looks diabolical.
That's just the way a baby monkey feels about it.
Placing on loud sounds, moving mechanical parts, all of these things are designed to frighten a monkey.
Greetings friends, I'm Arnold Schroeder and this is Fight Like an Animal.
Today we are going to add a crucial dimension to this sort of grand synthesis that the podcast overall is attempting.
I guess it's a theme that I definitely touched on a fair amount in what elephants can teach us about civil war.
But today I will be making a radical departure from my usual format of droning on and on about scientific papers that I've read all by myself,
and interviewing a trauma specialist.
This will be the first of a few interviews that I am going to do with Joshua Silva.
And I think that he is an ideal person for me to engage in this inquiry about because on the one hand he has a great deal of practical experience
treating individual trauma and training people in the paradigm he uses to treat people.
But he's also acutely aware of the ways in which our social structure contributes to our psychological distress
and our psychological distress contributes to our social structure.
The reciprocally informed feedback loop of trauma in which we are all seemingly pretty trapped.
Now I do want to acknowledge before we get started that I have been throwing a potentially somewhat chaotic number of themes out into the ether recently
which I haven't, none of which I've resolved or concluded.
We're now working on three parallel series at once.
I've found contra what I said in my last episode in Group Mind Part 2.
The Group Mind series is not going to be four episodes and it's not going to be nearly as conceptually segregated and concise as I was kind of thinking it might be.
I'm realizing as I have begun working on the next episodes in that series that it's a really pretty open-ended affair
and I am just going to allow that to be the case because I don't want to fall into a trap of trying to be so concise that I just don't cover relevant material.
But to give one some sense of a vague roadmap, if that is helpful, there will in fact be only two more scientific militant episodes.
I'm working on those in parallel to the Group Mind episodes.
So at some point I will manage to wrap up that series and then continue churning out what feels like a true infinity of Group Mind episodes at the moment.
All the while releasing these episodes where I discussed trauma with Joshua and quite possibly continue to develop that theme in some formats other than the interview one when we conclude that when and only when
I am done with a scientific militant series and we are working on a mere two parallel tracks.
I also want to start including some material that really begins to ask the question of how this podcast could potentially provide a basis for some kind of collective endeavor for a shared research project,
a think tank, a format for political experiments.
I don't know exactly what right, but what I do know is that I have ceased being able to do a lot of the kinds of political engagement that I've spent a lot of time and energy in my life on
because I am just so skeptical at this point of the outcomes associated with those efforts.
And at the same time I am getting really interesting feedback from people with a bunch of diverse perspectives and skills about this podcast.
It seems to be something that people want to hear.
So it seems like the logical thing to do at some point to try to cohere some of that energy into, you know, I don't know, the breathtaking new paradigm that completely shifts the entire landscape of political possibility,
I guess is really the only thing worth going for.
I really don't know exactly what that looks like.
I mean, maybe that just looks like a Discord server, a discussion group kind of thing, at least to start out with, but I'll be giving some thought to that and talking about possibilities on the podcast.
And then I think generally as we move forward, we're getting to this exciting phase where I've kind of gone, I've, you know, conceptually segregated out some material and done some series, done some individual episodes
where I'm addressing stuff and we are moving more and more into, I mean, I feel like synthesis is always a big theme in the podcast, but we're moving more and more towards a phase
where I feel like I can start synthesizing some of the different material from the different episodes into a more grand cohesive unified theory of everything.
You know, for instance, in the group mind episodes that we're about to get into, there'll be an opportunity for me to discuss the relationship between some of these dynamics of group psychology I've been getting into
in the way that they allow for a pretty free, wild variation in belief, behavior, affect, etc.
And some of the earliest material I discussed, the biology of the right-left divide, and also the psychology of power and how all those three things relate to each other.
And I think when we add all of those dimensions together into an analysis, it's vastly more powerful than any of those dimensions in isolation, hopefully not a surprising contention.
In this likewise, introducing in a rigorous way, in an extensive way, the themes of trauma and how they shape social and political realities and likewise how social and political realities shape trauma adds, again, another huge dimension to our understanding,
to, you know, some kind of like broad theory that we're trying to construct in this podcast that will be far more powerful in conjunction with all of the other material that we're touching on.
So I am deeply grateful to Joshua for taking the time to do this interview with me and let's get into it.
Okay, today I am here with Joshua Silva, PhD, faculty for the Somatic Experiencing Trauma Institute and Executive Director of the Revolve Foundation.
Joshua, I'm super excited to be doing this. Thanks for taking the time to have this exchange with me.
For sure. Thanks for having me.
Yeah. So I guess if we were going to start at the very beginning, the obvious first question to ask is just what do you tell people who aren't really familiar with somatic experiencing at all or are only vaguely familiar?
Like, how do you just describe it?
Well, it falls under the tradition of somatics, sometimes body-centered psychotherapy. So it's bringing the body into psychological healing.
Somatic experiencing is focused on trauma. So an understanding of trauma is central to what we do. But a lot of it is really understanding that trauma, I would say, more broadly psychological distress isn't just thinking errors.
That a lot of what we experience, a lot of what besets us as modern people is related to what we could call bottom-up influence. So dysregulation of the autonomic nervous system, brainstem functions, disturbances in emotion processing.
So the modern fascination tends to be with how do we change the way that we think and thus alter the course of our lives. And part of a somatic experiencing orientation is understanding that, as Bessel van der Kolk, one of the leading lights of traumatology has said,
if you're using cognitive behavioral therapy or basically thinking therapy to treat trauma, you're treating the wrong part of the brain. We have to in some way dig deeper and understand this more as a biological process than just a psychological one.
And I assume that in the models you guys use of trauma and trauma responses, there's probably arrows of causation pointing both directions. Thoughts do influence the body, but also the thing that seems to be left out of most psychotherapeutic paradigms is this notion that your mental processes are being generated by your physiological states and the condition your body is in.
Exactly. Yeah. Dr. Steven Porges, another prominent voice in the psychobiology of trauma has talked about the autonomic nervous system, the part of our nervous system that governs the functioning of organs and glands as creating the neurological platforms for behavior.
So what's happening with our heart rate, with our respiration, with our blood pressure, all of that broadcasts information that then conditions what we can think and how we can behave.
And everybody now is familiar with the fight flight response. If you're in a state of fight or flight, your options are actually fairly limited in terms of how you can think about stuff and what you can do to address what's in front of you.
There's also now increasing recognition partially due to Dr. Peter Levine's work with Sematic Experiencing of the freeze response, this sort of evolutionarily ancient shutdown or energy conservation response that the autonomic nervous system creates for us in situations of life threat.
And that is an even more limited and limiting neural platform, in the sense that when you're in freeze, it shuts down access to body sensations, it shuts down emotion processing, and it leaves you in some fundamental way disconnected.
In conventional traumatology, that's understood as being disconnected from the body, from different capacities for coping and wellness, but I would also say that it leaves us disconnected from each other, from the world, from the earth.
Can you tell us before we get any deeper into the practice and the theory, just kind of like what your path into this work was?
Yeah, a lot of this, for me, turns on a question that I think animates you as well, which is, how might we be able to forestall what feels to be a movement towards the end of life on earth?
Right.
It's, you know, having seen for a good long while now the trajectory of this culture and what feels like, probably heard this term, ecocide, you know, that there's this, there seems to be this imperative in the culture to towards some kind of destruction.
You know, how might we get going in a different direction?
So, you know, as part of different movements for social and ecological justice in my youth and for a good long while, and at some point I started to see that the work that I was doing and the work that I saw others that I really respected doing didn't seem to be getting us where we wanted to be.
And so started to think more critically about those efforts.
I got really interested in something called ecocycology, you know, really looking at the healing power of nature and the importance of the human connection with nature.
And, you know, really started to see things in a different way and understand that it's really not until there's some kind of shift in our individual and collective experience of ourselves that we're going to really be able to alter our environmental practices.
You know, that it's a little bit similar to what we were saying about individual biology, you know, you can't just change the way you think.
No matter how persuasive our argumentation might be about why you would want to adopt a more, you know, ecologically sane approach to life on this planet.
And behavior isn't going to shift until there's a different signal, you know, coming from, from, from, you know, those bottom up kinds of circuits so got really interested in, in helping people to get more well, you know, and get more sane.
Big influence for me was Paul Shepard, you know, and his question, you know, what, why, why do humans persist in destroying their habitat? And a big answer for this came for me when I started to study somatic experiencing and really understand this
real biological approach and to see, you know, how trauma, broadly speaking, really limits our capacity to, to, you know, have a fuller experience of ourselves and grow into our, you know, full sort of mature capacities.
And so SE became a real passion for me, you know, to, to really advance what for me is really just a reconnection with our birthright, you know, to be able to experience regulation and resilience, you know, as a human organism is, is something that, you know, we all, we all deserve.
And unfortunately, our culture hasn't really facilitated for, you know, the vast majority of us.
Yeah, no, that is interesting. That's, there's a strong point of convergence there in that while, while I have almost no kind of like background in like I don't have much trauma theory under my belt and I don't know a lot about like psychotherapeutic approaches.
I definitely feel similarly broadly speaking that what I see happening sociopolitically, there's ultimately this, this really big question of like, like a lot of the, a lot of the sort of like sociopolitical phenomena that I identify as problems, I think are really wrapped up in fear responses that people are having.
And there's not, you know, it's like, exactly like you're saying this like this like bottom up phenomena occur where like people will have these very intricate debates about a policy or a political position or whatever.
And I think ultimately like where people are coming from is not a function of these like intricate logical arguments that they're constructing or these debates they're having.
It's literally just like a process in their body. And so that, that begets this fundamental question of like how do we shift people's basic perceptual states? How do we like affect some kind of regime change in things like that and how much of like a persistent fear response characterizes their daily perceptions and things like that.
And in terms of like somatic experiencing and some of the work you're doing, I mean, you'll have to forgive me because basically the theory that I've assimilated is from reading a single book written in 1997.
I think it was 97 Peter Levine's Waking the Tiger.
Uh huh.
Right. And so I'm sure that I'm sure you guys have been like accumulating all kinds of exciting new insights and like really developing that theory since that time. But something I was really fascinated by is the sense that it sounds like he's, you know, because I'm always fascinated by like cross species comparisons.
And that is like a sort of starting point for him as he talks about how animals experience terrifying traumatic things all the time and they're not impervious. They have a really strong response to it.
But they seem to like be able to almost like complete it in a way that we are often unable to. And I wondered if you could tell us about that about the like cross species sort of like trauma response as as people in your discipline.
Understand it or as you understand it.
Yeah, for sure.
If I could a brief tale before we get there.
Please.
I'm talking about these like fear responses and you know the way in which though we like to think so you know it's probably not logic that is is governing these these dialogues that are happening.
I was recently at a I was helping a family member organize some some finances and they wanted to go to a financial planner.
And so I was just sort of sitting there kind of listening in, you know, seeing if there was some way I could be helpful but knowing that they're almost assuredly wasn't.
And and at one point, you know, they were talking about like the stock market and such at one point I couldn't help myself and I just I looked at the person this this man who is, you know, just earnestly trying to generate, you know, more money out of whatever, you know, meager amount of money this this person had.
And, and I said, how do we think that we can continue to have infinite growth on a planet with finite resources.
And the utter befuddlement with which this person looked at me was it just it illuminated the whole thing in a way, you know that there's just.
You know that the critical faculties of, of, you know, the broader populace, so to speak, is just not there, you know, and you could you could try to logic that all day long, you know, and it's just, it's probably going to be a fruitless effort.
Anyways, so the, the cross species comparisons are, I think, essential, crucial, you know, starting to understand how the human organism is continuous with other organisms and to, you know, recognize that we are animals and we have, by and large, the same animal
physiology of, as our, you know, mammalian counterparts is, I think, an important starting point for self understanding. The, the understanding in se that, you know, I also resonate with a lot that that when we are in situations that are activating that are stimulating where
there's danger where there's threat, that that creates a whole cascade of biological responses that induce, you know, these shifts in, in how, how our, how our body functions, and that we, we need that, you know, we need that, that survival energy when we're in a situation that's threatening
to us to have this, this body, like our, our body is so adept at just immediately shifting our state to meet challenge. I mean, it's, it's, you know, if you've ever had the experience of, you know, your cutting vegetables, and then the knife slips out of your hand.
And before you know it, you have jumped back, you know, out of the way of that, you know, and you didn't have to think about that. It all happened immediately. And then, you know, you might need to take a minute and sort of take a breath, you know, because you can feel how your heart rate increased.
I mean, all of that happened instantaneously. I mean, it's just amazing how good the body is at doing that. And similarly, the way that our physiology is designed, we're really good at then settling. You know, once the threat has passed, we're designed to then be able to orient to our environment to recognize
that it's relatively safe that that threat is gone. And now I can deactivate. Now I can, the part of our, our autonomic nervous system that we call the parasympathetic, the, the brake pedal of the, of the system comes back on and calms everything down. Unfortunately, there seems to be a phenomenon that's I think closely tied to modern civilization that inhibits that
response. So whereas animals in the wild, as, as, as the bean says, animals in the wild, though threatened routinely rarely become traumatized. And that seems to be because there's a, there's a reliable process that their physiology goes through to discharge that
survival energy that is being inhibited for, for domesticated humans and our domesticated animals. You know, so I think it's quite telling that it seems like the animals that are more likely to be traumatized are humans and another domesticated animals.
So perhaps something about the way that we have decided to live our efforts at control and domination have interfered in this natural immunity to, to trauma.
Yeah, I mean, that makes a lot of sense. I keep, it's really, it's like a question I've pondered a lot is like, why do our heads seem to get so in the way of these processes that seem like, you know, our innate endowment, like it seems like we, we have the coordinate somewhere in our nervous systems to, to navigate these, these episodes that we just get kind of stuck in and it does.
I know in my own life, like I keep coming back to this perception, but I don't think it's like the true root cause, but this perception that I would be able to navigate the traumatic experiences I've had so much more elegantly if I literally didn't just have this conception that I shouldn't be as affected by them as I am, that that's like this, this fundamental barrier that I just experienced over and over again is like, essentially an unwillingness
to experience the full scope of how something affected me, unless it like, it retains this power, right? And so, you know, I spend a lot of time wondering why, you know, like why people are like that and the extent to which that is like a modern affliction as opposed to something that's, I don't know, like, generally like, you know, like universal to all humanity or whatever, but
it seems like there must be, it seems like there must be multiple causes, but it is, it is the case, because obviously like non human species can get really traumatized, but yeah, I guess the cases that I know of are either in like settings of actual confinement, like laboratories, things like that.
I also do know that, like I know elephants exhibit a lot of trauma, but it's only when their social structures have been radically altered, like when they no longer have the intricate like webs of social support that they would typically develop and then they do like they get totally broken by by traumatic events.
And so it seems like there's this sort of like reciprocally informed thing that we must be talking about where on the one hand, the way our society is probably itself causes trauma, but it also seems like the atypical social structures we live in probably just have a lot to do with why we can't process trauma when it occurs, like there
must be. And so that brings up to me that brings up just this infinite landscape of questions of like how, how do we heal in a modern society, like if you were if you're alone in your apartment, how you know, like, is there some kinds of healing that you really need a community
for, for instance, like, do you encounter a lot of that do you encounter like a sense that people's lives are just like structured in ways that make it really difficult to like provide them with any kind of healing or like guide them.
Mm hmm. Yeah, I mean, absolutely. So so much in there that, you know, is worth responding to but just to just to emphasize this quality of inhibition, you know, that that there's something that happens when we say to ourselves, I should feel differently than I do.
You know, in the Eastern mystics have been saying for millennia, you know, that that we have this thing called karma, you know, that we carry around with us this, this sort of baggage, and that that, you know, influences what happens in our lives and you know, there's
different ways of understanding this. Sometimes it's a more metaphysical notion, you know, that karma is carried from previous lifetimes. But, you know, some people talk about karma basically as unlived experience, you know, that that it's that which we which hasn't really been fully lived
through and burned to ash that continues to live within us and influence, you know, us in the here and now. So there's really something about not having fully experienced something, right, how that that, you know, pollutes my here and now experience in some way.
And, you know, why does this happen? You know, some people have said that they think that, you know, we're vulnerable to trauma because we have particularly developed neocortex.
I think that's what I keep wondering if like part of it is just like an intrinsic property of all this gray matter we have for abstract thought.
Yeah. You know, that's that's never landed for me super well as an explanatory framework because, you know, a few things one is that, you know, as we were just talking about, we do see animals getting, you know, having exhibiting behavioral signs that look a lot like PTSD.
And, you know, also our species has been around without, you know, significant genetic modifications for at least 200,000 years, you know, significantly longer depending on how we think about the question.
And, you know, I myself don't think that we would have been as as long lived and successful a primate. If we had this sort of, you know, built in
a bug, you know, like if the human if homo sapiens, you know, had this, this, this, this, you know, design flaw, where we were vulnerable to trauma, you know, and every one of our ancestors that had, you know, been chased by a saber toothed tiger, you
know, would have, you know, stayed in the cave for the rest of their lives, you know, phobia or something. We wouldn't have made it. But instead, you know, what you see when you look at the human lineage is this like robust profusion of just total bad asses,
you know, like, you know, the, the, the, you know, like chasing, you know, lions and off of their kills is I mean, you know, like humans, humans are not, are not, you know, don't have a such a tendency to towards, you know, like those kinds of endemic fear responses.
So, you know, I tend to, I tend to look a little bit more towards what would seem to correlate better with what we're seeing and look more at culture, you know, or particular lifestyle, let's say, as the, as the cause.
And, and I do, you know, I think of modern civilization, you know, call it our, our 10,000 year long love affair with control, you know, where we've, we've set ourselves up as the, the entity that determines, you know, which plants should grow and which should die and which animals get to live and which animals were going to go out and, you know,
extirpate and we live in these buildings that we, we, you know, we call them the false tropics. Sometimes, you know, we're always trying to control our climate and, and make sure that everything is as comfortable as possible.
And, you know, I think that our thirst to dominate and control nature has unfortunately had this corollary where we have attempted to control and dominate our own nature, our own biology.
And that this has really led us, led us astray, you know, in terms of how we've become vulnerable to trauma and how we then put other, other critters, other mammals, other entities into these unnatural conditions of confinement and the sort of deep inhibition, you know, that you could, you know, if you think of like a dog, you know, and all the training that we put, you know, animals through it's like, it's all about inhibiting impulse.
And, you know, if you get too good at inhibiting impulse, you're also inhibiting the impulse that would facilitate you releasing all of that energy so that you wouldn't be traumatized.
Right. I guess that makes sense. I guess another piece of evidence in favor of the idea that this propensity for trauma that humans exhibit in modern context isn't truly intrinsic to us.
It would just be the fact that so many different metrics of psychological well-being are getting worse and worse over a very short period of time, like we are, it seems like we're witnessing kind of an exponential curve of deviation from evolutionary, evolutionarily typical conditions,
and then kind of like a matching curve of increasingly worsening psychological well-being.
So yeah, that makes sense. Can you talk about, I was particularly interested reading Waking the Tiger in the discussion of the, like the freeze response and the sense that something like that is playing out over a much longer term scale
than is evolutionarily typical in traumatized people?
Yeah, we'll talk about, sometimes call it functional freeze. Autonomic nervous system states as neural substrates for behavior or neural platforms for behavior.
It also seems like we can override that. And this is where the neocortex, you know, might actually come into play.
Because though the freeze response is an energy conservation response, you know, it's fundamentally what the animal does when it thinks it's about to die.
Yeah.
You know, like if your fight or flight response has been unsuccessful, the organism will go to an older, in terms of evolution, older response of basically shutting things down.
This would be adaptive for a number of different reasons. But, you know, one of them is simply that if you become immobile, you know, the freeze response often associated with physical immobility,
if you become immobile, you are much more likely to be perceived by certain predatory animals as already dead and thus not worth consuming.
You know, it could be tainted meat. So they have their own evolutionarily determined behavioral response of ignoring immobile prey.
And so, you know, sometimes there's incredible video, you know, even if an animal has chased down a particular, you know, prey, a predator has chased down a particular prey animal.
And then that prey animal goes immobile, the predator will move on and say, well, I guess that's not dinner.
So this freeze response, you know, can be very adaptive. And for animals, it's a time limited response. You know, for mammals, going into freeze can actually be lethal because it shuts everything down.
Sure.
We really need the metabolic resources of, you know, blood flow and all that good stuff, you know, our brain is really hungry for sugars and all kinds of, you know, metabolic resources.
So the freeze response needs to be time limited. But it really looks like people can go into a sort of prolonged freeze response where that energy conservation becomes in some way habitual or endemic.
And when I look around in the world today, you know, I think I see a fair number of people that are experiencing this.
And this is, you know, this is really worth thinking about because some of the things that the freeze response does is it, you know, it shuts down, you know, our ability to feel ourselves.
It shuts down our emotions, you know, it leaves us without access to that part of our nervous system that supports social engagement.
And, you know, I think that there might be a good number of people out there walking around, you know, disconnected from themselves, disconnected from each other.
And, you know, potentially making decisions that impact, you know, millions of people, but doing so without access to their affective states, their emotions, and without access to that sense of, you know, an intrinsic connection
or embeddedness within, you know, the humanity.
And so I know there's a kind of bewildering variety of states that are called disassociative states.
But is the understanding that this prolongation of the freeze response is a basis of, has something pretty significant to do with
all these different states we call disassociative?
I think so. Yeah. I mean, in the training, I'll sometimes make, you know, really want to make clear that I believe that it's possible to dissociate in any of the nervous system states.
You know, that we could say that, you know, as like Kathy Kane, one of our SE faculty has done, you know, we could say that freeze is a physiological state, whereas dissociation is a psychological construct.
Okay. Yeah.
They do often co-occur, but I also see people dissociate while in that fight-or-flight response.
So, you know, it's not like a necessary precondition for dissociation, but I think, you know, and some people, some researchers have pointed to an aspect of this nervous system state of energy conservation
being the release of neuropeptides that promote, that could promote dissociation.
Okay. You know, so that when everything, and, you know, one of the things that we know is that when the organism goes into freeze, it releases endogenous opiates.
And, you know, the idea with this is that one of the ways in which that would be an evolutionarily determined response is that if I'm not feeling pain, I'm going to be much less likely to, they call it, minister to the wound.
You know, if I'm injured, if a predatory animal brings me down and in the process I'm wounded, my impulse would be to lick the wound, you know,
or to do something and nothing will induce predatory behavior like something like that.
If I look wounded, if I'm appearing damaged, that makes predators go wild because they're always looking for, you know, the easier kill.
You know, so they'll, you know, that'll be the end of me so that that kind of, you know, not feeling pain also might allow me to make an escape in a situation where I'm feeling, you know, I would otherwise be incapacitated by pain.
So that can be a really useful thing in certain situations, but you know, it's possible that the release of those endogenous opiates could also promote a sense of disconnection from the body or, you know, some kind of dissociative state.
Yeah, yeah, that's interesting.
So, okay, I know that in some sense we're probably treading into kind of perilous terrain here.
I'm sure you work with people who use all kinds of different methods and I'm sure there is some value in those collaborations.
But I guess it seems like a lot of psychotherapeutic paradigms, certainly most that I've personally been exposed to, admittedly most of which has been involuntarily, but some of it hasn't been.
It seems like most psychotherapeutic paradigms are like kind of saying something fairly antithetical to what you're saying.
It seems like they are really about restraint and promoting a sense that there's something wrong with just kind of having the embodied experience that you're having and really like letting it manifest in its entirety.
And they, like it seems like a lot of the emphasis is on more detachment, getting more in your head and how instead of like just kind of going through a behavior experience,
trying to like sort of incessantly critique and analyze where that's happening.
And what kind of like ostensible alternatives exist, you know, cognitive behavioral therapy, all that stuff.
So, you know, I guess what I'm asking is do you think that you work with people or do you think people in general are sometimes kind of more harmed by these psychotherapeutic approaches than they benefit from them?
Yeah, that's a good question. I don't know that it depends on how we define harm.
Sure.
You know, I mean, another facet of, you know, mainstream or conventional psychotherapeutic interventions, which you've probably also likely noticed is that they tend to emphasize functionality.
The goal is to get people functional.
And, you know, in this culture, that means a more robust participant in, you know, the destruction of all that we hold dear.
So, you know, it's, you know, that emphasis that, you know, you see in a lot of therapeutic orientations on, you know, assimilation or something like that is, you know, to my mind, something that we should jettison, you know, as quickly as possible.
There is something that I think is important to our, to, you know, any, you know, healing enterprise, which kind of dovetails with what you were saying.
And that would be the cultivation of a witness.
You know, one of the things that we'll say in our work is that without, you know, the technical term, you know, might be something like observing ego.
Without an observer, we're going to have a tough time, you know, because one of the things that, you know, as a trauma therapist, you know, I'm in a lineage with lots of approaches that in previous eras had been for at least some people retraumatizing.
Yeah.
You know, there's a lot of ways that people have sought to, you know, heal their trauma over the years that have actually created, have actually made them worse.
You know, have actually created significant wounding.
And so a big emphasis in SE is not retraumatizing our clients.
Right.
And part of that is intentionally cultivating this witness, you know, really making sure that there's a part of us that is on board that is taking stock of what's happening, not necessarily analyzing it, but aware observing.
Sometimes this is called metacognition thinking about thinking.
And for whatever reason with us humans, you know, it seems like it's a really important thing.
So to the extent that, you know, these prior experiences you had, you know, induced more of that witness, that might actually be salutary.
But when the witness's task becomes not observing experience, noticing when experience trends in the direction of coherence and emphasizing those aspects, but instead is, you know, this, I believe a totally illusory, but quite compelling, you know, project of controlling things.
I think that can actually start to lead us astray.
And, you know, all of that top down stuff, you know, there might be a place for that, you know, in our approach we'll sometimes talk about how the work can have different phases.
And people come in out of control, you know, generally people seek treatment, you know, and this is partially I think also based on our cultural framework.
But people often seek treatment when things feel out of control.
When they no longer have the ability to meaningfully alter the course of their own lives.
And that's the stage where they say, okay, something needs to change.
And we'll say that at that point we're going to engage in a process of co-regulation, you know, where we kind of offer our nervous system.
And just as happens in our individual lives, you know, as babies we come into the world, babies are a total mess.
You know, we can't even regulate our own body temperature.
You know, we're just utterly dependent on, you know, bigger, more competent humans to regulate, you know, co-regulate with.
And so, you know, as practitioners we might do something like that.
And, you know, we really, in a way, make sure that the person's experience is going to trend, you know, more in the direction of health and wellness.
But then at some point we might start to get into self-regulation.
And at first, some of these top-down efforts can be really important for that.
So we'll say that there can be two phases to self-regulation.
And the first would be explicit self-regulation.
So we're going to hear you use these terms explicit and implicit, which are just psychological terms meaning, you know, known or not known or available to conscious awareness or not available to conscious awareness.
So the first stage of self-regulation is really about doing things that begin to help me feel better.
And that can be really, really, really important, you know, for people to, again, gain a sense of control.
You know, as you've mentioned on your podcast, you know, we know that, you know, well-being seems to be correlated with an internal locus of control.
You know, that we, as humans seem to appreciate, you know, the sense that, like, you know, we can do stuff ourselves and that we're not just subject to the whims of others or, you know, other structures.
And, you know, so some of these, like, these, to whatever extent they were helpful, you know, these different things that, you know, these different techniques that were offered to you.
You know, that might be a useful part of a person's journey back to, you know, reattaining our birthright.
But eventually we would want to help people to shift out of that mode of these explicit efforts to regulate our experience and begin to recognize that our systems are actually designed to regulate themselves
and to go more towards implicit self-regulation where, you know, the regulation happens in a way for us and we're not having to, you know, do everything to make it happen.
And so that's where, you know, we would go through this being out of control to gaining a sense of control but then needing to access letting go of control
to make this discovery that, you know, this actually is a propensity, a naturally occurring propensity of our systems.
And that's the piece that you don't really get anywhere else.
Yeah, I was really struck reading Waking the Tiger by descriptions of processes of trauma recovery that he helped facilitate in people where at some point
it really left the realm, like you're saying, of any kind of like explicit analytical engagement with what's happening or why,
and took on this kind of highly metaphorical quality where people are having experiences that are, you know, processes of trauma recovery and experiential integration,
but the actual imagery that they're describing, the subjective experience they're having is way more, I don't know, like metaphorical,
just like a bunch of really rich imagery and stuff that seems pretty idiosyncratically in the realm of the actual individual,
like no two people would have the same.
And I don't know, it really feels pretty like dreamlike or like it captures honestly a lot of the qualities of a myth.
Do you have sessions like that? Is that something you, do you experience sessions with people where they're engaging in all this really like vivid dreamlike imagery?
Yeah, absolutely. I mean, ideally, we're working with different levels of the psyche in this process.
As we're saying, if you're using cognitive behavioral therapy to treat trauma, you're treating the wrong part of the brain,
and we want to have, I believe, this more integrated experience of ourselves.
If you could use, Levine has this model that he calls PsyBAM, and, you know, in this notion of PsyBAM, there's different qualities of experience,
sensation, image, behavior, affect or emotion, and meaning or, you know, thinking.
And that, you know, it's likely through the integrated experience of these different channels, you know, that we can most fully, you know, come to know ourselves
and awaken and access, you know, innate healing propensities.
So, you know, one of the things about doing SE for me is that one of the things that I love is that every session is different.
You know, I can show up to a day of work and, you know, see, you know, six, seven, eight totally different kinds of experiences.
You know, for one person, it might be very slow. They might be renegotiating a freeze, you know, an experience of going into freeze,
and it's just like, you know, a little imagery, but not a whole lot happening.
Somebody else, they may be very vigorous, and, you know, they're accessing their healthy aggression, and, you know, they're pushing, and, you know, it's, they're roaring like an animal,
or, you know, somebody else might be, you know, reflecting, and, you know, my, to the extent that my system is regulated,
you know, I should, I should define this term. I've used it a few times, regulation.
Like, what does that actually mean? Again, I think, owing to certain cultural biases, sometimes you hear people use this term regulation,
and it seems to be a synonym for calm. Like, you need to be more regulated, you know.
But what regulation actually means physiologically is the attenuation of different variables so that, you know, we are in the optimal state
to respond to different kinds of experience. Which might in some cases be a pretty animated state.
It's not, it's not always adaptive to be calm. Exactly. Exactly.
Being calm is not, is not always adaptive.
So this, you know, this, this, this regulation is, is, you know, really key.
And, you know, it's something that we might not have as much access to, especially if there's been, you know, trauma or something else.
And to the extent that I as a practitioner am regulated, I will be able to flex to meet people where they're at,
and join in support of completion.
So are you saying that you'll adopt some version of the experience that your patients are having,
that you'll go on some version of the journey they're on, experience some of their affect, behavior, subjective world?
Some version of it, you know, like, like I'm the one that's holding the container for the experience.
So obviously, you know, if I'm getting, if I'm dysregulated, you know, if I'm outside the bounds of what's actually going to be helpful for the situation,
then, you know, then that's a problem. But I often will experience some quality of that.
And I will, you know, I will give myself permission as a practitioner to demonstrate that to the client,
which also acts as a cue for some kind of disinhibition, you know, that it's really okay.
Like, you know, if my client says, you know, I had this really frustrating experience with my boss the other day,
I might go, hmm, like, hmm, like, yes.
Yeah, which is, you know, which is that that sense of like, it's really okay to be with your experience.
Like, we're not going to just dip our toe into it and then come back to analytical reflection and decide that like the feeling that I had
actually isn't right and isn't appropriate and talk ourselves out of it and all that.
You know, if I have somebody who has anger management issues, I'll definitely be doing that.
You know, like if the work is really about developing more inhibitory capacity, which for some people it absolutely is,
I'm going to be analyzing with them all day, you know, and pulling away from the experience because they have a tendency to get swallowed up by their experience.
But for a good number of people and maybe for all people at a certain point in the journey, you know, I really think it becomes about
getting curious enough about what's happening to, as we were saying in terms of, you know, this notion of karma to really live that through,
you know, in a non-judgmental way with our witness on board, not getting swallowed up by the experience,
not deciding that, you know, the feeling is true necessarily, but to really be with it and to let it move through us, you know.
Sometimes that might entail a very vivid kind of experiencing, but once we've built that capacity for resilience, you know,
which part of that is knowing, trusting via repeated experiences of it that we can deactivate, you know, that we can go into that state of excitation and activation
because we know that on the other side is the calm, you know, we're no longer afraid of what that might be because now we can trust that,
yeah, I can get amped up because I know that my system will just be able to calm right down afterwards.
Yeah, and I guess that really relates to what we were talking about towards the beginning of living in a culture of restraint.
So people don't have, they haven't really like built that muscle.
I guess a lot of people haven't really developed a lot of experience with going into radically different states than some kind of default state
and having like a massive, you know, a massive shift in what feels like reality and then coming out the other side of that.
So it feels threatening, like a sheer intensity of experience on its own feels threatening, feels like, okay, this is the end of the world,
I'm going crazy, this will destroy me.
Part of this to me relates to humans not wanting to be like other animals.
Yeah, totally. Yeah, I emphatically agree.
It's a real shame. It's a real problem.
It is, it's a huge problem.
So I feel like we should wrap up for now and resume this conversation sometime hopefully soon.
I wanted to ask one last question, which is just about, I mean, you've just said all these sessions are really different.
But could you give us some kind of little preview into, I mean, I assume there's, you know, like there's a fundamental commonality to all of them that you're trying to engage people with their bodies
and get them out of the purely mental version of processing trauma, right?
And so can you give us any kind of little insight into what that's actually like, what you actually do to try to achieve?
I know that that's a really vast topic, but you know, some little preview?
Yeah, well, you know, one of the, you know, you kind of asked about what would you say if somebody didn't have any familiarity.
And, you know, sometimes in my elevator pitch, you know, on SE, I'll say, you know, traditional, or maybe you should say conventional psychotherapy would be interested in your thoughts and maybe a little bit your feelings about things.
And a somatic approach is going to be really interested in what you feel in your body.
You know, so in addition to questions like, Oh, tell me more, what, you know, how did that feel? Or, you know, what did you think in that moment?
I'll be saying something like, what do you notice in your body experience? And oftentimes that's, you know, what do you notice in your body experience right now?
You know, anytime that we are accessing, you know, memory in the brain, there's a state dependent response where our, you know, our whole physiological system is also responding.
And by accessing what's technically called interoception, you know, the feeling of what's happening inside our bodies, we can get a tremendous amount of information and, you know, a tremendous amount of non conceptual information,
which is really important to counterbalance that, you know, tendency to sort of go in and analyze.
So, you know, I might, if we were having, you know, one of these conversations, you know, I might say, you know, so, you know, just maybe telling me a little bit about what's happening in your body experience right now.
And for some people that's like, huh, you know, one of the things that I've done in virtually every training that I've done is at some point I'll look around the room or the zoom screen these days and say, who here was regularly asked, what do you feel in your body by your caregivers?
And I have yet to see a hand go up. Well, actually one, a hand went up once, I think. And then I said, oh, tell me more. And they were like, well, it was a babysitter. So I'm not sure if that counts. But, you know, the, the, and this is like, you know, thousands of people at this point.
There, there is in this as part of this, this mode that we're in, there is a profound disconnection from the body and a profound disconnection from instinct, you know, from paying attention to those, those whisperings that that come in this bottom up way.
And, you know, so, so for sure, you know, with some people I'll be doing body scans, you know, which is where you sort of go through the body and just report, you know, anything that you can become aware of.
I'll be inviting people to feel difference, you know, for some people before they're actually going to be able to report sensations, they'll be able to tell me that their, their top half feels different than their bottom half.
So we'll engage in some kind of, and sometimes this will take months or longer, you know, but we'll engage in a process of discovery so that they develop that facility, you know, with noticing what's happening in the body, you know, where things are tight, where they're warm, where there's a tingling, you know, where things might feel like a little, there's a trembling.
And, and it's through the paying attention to that and integrating that into experience. It's not like, you know, we're not interested in emotions or thoughts, you know, hopefully is that Saibam model makes clear, you know, it's really about a process of integration.
But the somatic element, you know, the interoceptive process tends to be the piece that's underrepresented in modern people's experience. So that's the one that we, we tend to highlight.
Well, very cool. Thank you so much, Joshua, for taking the time to convey some of this stuff that you have spent so many years working on and learning about. And I really do think that we should continue talking at some point in the future.
It was, it was definitely my pleasure. And I would be, of course, honored to talk with you anytime.