Title: Heal Like an Animal Interview With Joshua Sylvae pt 2
Episode #: 24
Episode ID: 7714378
Source: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/7714378-heal-like-an-animal-interview-with-joshua-sylvae-pt-2.mp3
------------------------------------------------------------

=== EPISODE METADATA ===
Generated: 2026-01-12 01:02:07
Episode ID: 6596359
MP3 File: 6596359-scientific-militant-pt-1.mp3
Title: Scientific Militant pt. 1
Podcast/Artist: Against the Internet
Album/Series: Fight Like An Animal
Source URL: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/6596359-scientific-militant-pt-1.mp3
========================
In 2015, life is a chaotic struggle for survival, as it always is.
And there are perils and travails and agonies, which we can't anticipate now, just as there
are for us now, that most people couldn't have anticipated 30 years ago.
However, for all the complexity and darkness and crisis that seems to inevitably characterize life,
life itself is going to continue, because the Earth is retaining the capacity to support it.
A very significant proportion of the extinctions that were well underway a few decades before
have been halted and even reversed. Many species and ecosystem processes are recovering,
and the framework for new evolutionary processes exists for life to continue its trends toward
greater complexity and integration. Likewise, many social dynamics which seemed intractable
and which were horribly worsening just a few decades before are trending in the opposite direction.
While people will always cause one another pain, the quotient of monstrous cruelty in the world
has significantly declined, and people are thus able to achieve greater and greater potentials.
So, let's take this state of affairs, three decades from now as our starting point,
and reverse engineer it, asking what conditions are necessary to achieve it.
This will be an act of storytelling, but it will also be an act of scientific inquiry.
And while I may spend a lot of time attacking binaries I don't think are useful,
and while scientific inquiry and storytelling certainly do not exist in any clear binary
opposition to one another. I mean, they're reciprocally informed phenomena, manifestations of
one another. Let's indulge in some strict dualism and make clear lines of demarcation between these
two approaches, particularly because there's a temporal dimension. What will designate
storytelling happens in 2050, and what will designate scientific inquiry happens today.
The storytelling elements may be something recognizably like fiction, or at least reflect
the perspective of some imaginary entity, but they may just as likely or more likely be this podcast,
me talking, with all my particular obsessions and analytical frames just 30 years in the future.
In order to create, if not a semblance of order in this chaos, at least a guide to it,
in addition to obvious cues like me citing papers from the future, when we're in the
storytelling mode, I'll be sure to include some kind of drone or music or soundscape of some
kind, like I did at the very beginning, when I said, you know, the year is 2050 and all that.
Let me give you another example, just to be as clear as possible. Well, and because that is,
after all, the whole format of the show. It's not really appropriate or necessary to speak
of someone in particular conceiving of the scientific militant, because the core concept
is ultimately simple to the point of being obvious, and many people had articulated some
version of it, from radical environmentalists to science fiction writers to right-wing elements
paranoid about the UN. What is relevant is not some extraordinary insight someone had into the
nature of the entity itself that facilitated its establishment, but rather the arguments that
convinced early participants that it was viable, necessary, and indeed scientific.
The early trajectory of these arguments and the social processes with which they are associated,
in other words, the early organizing trajectory of the scientific militant to use activist language,
is the result of the convergence of just a handful of people and the convergence of
their particular idiosyncratic obsessions and avenues of inquiry. Gada Sabach was a high school
student and climate activist in Cairo when, in 2018, she first encountered Ryuichi Sakamoto's
Oppenheimer's Aria. She ended up watching it obsessively, often crying.
In Oppenheimer's Aria, Sakamoto sets to music the scientist's famous description of witnessing
the first test detonation of a nuclear bomb, which he gives in terms that are both a verly mythic
and suffused with considerable personal pain, and it is here that Oppenheimer sheds a single tear
when he says the word duty. But his expression doesn't change at all. Before and after this moment,
his face is a mask of agonized composure, but it's here that he cries. Sabach was deeply
affected by it on a purely emotional level, but she was also convinced that there was some
inference she was supposed to make from it. In a 2025 interview, she said this.
It would be a few years before I read Thomas Kuhn's The Structure of Scientific Revolutions,
but I had read a book that summarized its central arguments and conclusions,
and I realized that I was continually thinking about the text as I repeatedly watched Oppenheimer's
Aria. It became something of a crisis. There was something present in Oppenheimer's speech
that I was responding to, that I was certain informed my own life's work, and I didn't know what it was.
After a few days, I reached a few conclusions in this decisive rapid sequence.
I don't think any of these conclusions are intrinsically really all that conceptually dazzling,
but at the same time, they just weren't obvious to me at the time, and the experience
was like the explosion of something that has been building up pressure for a long time,
a mental experience that exists in relation to my baseline thought processes as orgasm does to sex.
Again, I'm not saying these insights are really all that stunning in the sense of
absolute intellectual achievement, but when I had them, they were accompanied by all this crazy
imagery, totally unrelated to the subject matter itself, imagery of archaic ceremonies for whatever
reason. The first insight was that Oppenheimer experienced a level of introspection about
and existential understanding of the reality of the destructive power he had created,
that those he had given this destructive power to definitely didn't. I thought of the leaders
of nations with nuclear weapons, and how absurd it was to imagine any of them weeping and quoting
the Bhagavad Gita while they were discussing destroying the world. My thought was that there
was a fairly intrinsic relationship here, that the cognitive architecture necessary to
create world-destroying technologies of many varieties was very different than the cognitive
architecture that tended to predispose one to acquiring power, and thus to being in a position
to use these technologies. Use these technologies in the case of things like nuclear weapons,
or to establish policies about their use in the case of things like fossil fuels.
I thought that the world was on the trajectory it was on because scientists had acted like those in
power were more like them than they really were. So I thought of Kuhn's scientific revolutions
of his claim that rather than progressing along a linear trajectory of accumulating results that
occasionally cross thresholds we might call breakthroughs, that science had a more distinctly
episodic history. Where periodically entirely new frames are introduced and new sets of variables
identified, where qualitatively different approaches come along. I thought science needed
such a decisive qualitative change in how it conceptualized itself and its relationship
to the broader society. I thought science needs a revolution. I meant this in precisely this sense
that Kuhn means it of establishing a new frame of reference and a qualitatively different
understanding of the world, but I also meant this in the sense of the social processes
we call revolutions when we're talking about whole societies.
I grew up in the shadow of Terere Square in the memory of it, right? And I was a climate activist,
so I had read all the standard nonviolent campaign strategy stuff, all the gene sharp and all that,
and it bothered me for a long time that Terere Square seemed like a perfect application of
a lot of these principles and also a complete failure ultimately. These were the ideas that
generally formed the foundation of climate campaigning for groups like the sunrise movement,
which I had worked with but also had a complex relationship with. Anyway, my sense was that
for these kinds of organizing and campaigning strategies to work, everyone would have to
share more of an epistemology than they actually did in complex modern societies,
but that even though scientists often believe many different things, the world of science could be
thought of as a society which really did have a sufficiently shared understanding of what knowledge
and how it's acquired a sufficiently shared epistemology that these classic campaigning
techniques could work within it. As with the standard strategy for creating a revolution in
a larger society, I thought that a militant minority would have to create crises of legitimacy for the
existing institutional structure of science and that they would face harsh opposition,
first called ridiculous and then called dangerous. Like the American labor organizer
Nicholas Klein said, first they ignore you, then they laugh at you, then they fight you,
then you win. I thought we would have to go through all these stages, but I thought it was
possible. At that moment, I realized my purpose was to shift the way science conceptualized
itself and its relationship to society at large. Admittedly, it would be a few years before
I got around to starting this process. Before I could revolutionize science, I had to, you know,
learn differential equations. Okay, greetings friends. I'm Arnold Schroeder. This is Fight Like
an Animal and today I am not alone. I'm with a friend. I'm Evan Leamer. Hey Evan, how's it going?
It's going pretty well. It's a lovely foggy night here in Portland, Oregon.
It is that. There was a time in the somewhat long and somewhat
torturous history of this episode of the podcast where I was sharing outlines with you and I was
like, yeah, you know, like I know it's a little note to self-esque, but like here it pretty
much is. Like this is it, right? And then I think that I think that we were going to record
originally like a week ago. And this is like, this is so characteristic for so many processes for me
where it's like, I can be really diligent and work in a really methodical way if that's literally
necessary. If it's like inherently just too much absolute work to all do in a few days right at
the end. But this, this was just classically one of those things where like, I just couldn't,
I could not make myself like flesh out some of that outline until like a few days ago. And
then naturally, like there was this huge like this orgy of like synthesis and research. And I was
like, Oh, right. And I got it. So yeah, what I'm saying is that I'm going to work from an outline
today that doesn't really look like the outline I set you. Well, it sounds good to me. I mean, just
in the in the half an hour of final preparations for me, I came across two or three relevant
subjects and just had to really stop myself from getting too deep into a Wikipedia hole.
Yeah, I guess that's the magic of all forms of inquiry.
Okay. So to start out with, the world scientists warning to humanity, a second notice.
I thought that this was like, I thought that this was a decent frame for for presenting this
whole episode because I mean, who knows how many of these like kinds of science communications
happens where it's like, some people get together. And they're like, we're scientists. And we need to
tell you that there's very alarming things we're seeing in the world is headed into a horrible
crisis. And you really should listen. And then nobody does. And but there's kind of like not
there's not like a feedback. There's never like that moment of assessment where it's like, well,
so did that work? Should we should we try something else or whatever? But what's
interesting about this is that it is the second notice. And so it's very, very, it's like,
very typical science communication as far as like, it's like very representative of this whole
genre, except that they're talking about how they it was written a few years ago. So it's
been more years now, but how 25 years previous, they had, you know, issued a dire warning that
nobody paid attention to. So to read a little bit from that, here's what they say. They say 25
years ago, the Union of Concerned Scientists and more than 1500 independent scientists,
including the majority of living noble laureates in the sciences, penned the 1992 World Scientists
Warning to Humanity. These concerned professionals called on humankind to curtail environmental
destruction and cautioned that a quote great change in our stewardship of the earth and
life on it is required if vast human misery is to be avoided and quote. In their manifesto,
they show that humans were on a collision course with the natural world. They expressed concern
about current impending or potential damage on planet earth involving ozone depletion,
freshwater availability, marine fisheries collapse, ocean dead zones, forest loss,
biodiversity destruction, climate change, and continued human population growth.
They proclaimed that fundamental changes were urgently needed to avoid the consequences our
present course would bring. And then, you know, so like, can you guess what they had to say
25 years later? It's like, more of the same. Yeah, because because if you're like a little bit
sooner, some, some vague sense of time. So to be clear, your guess isn't on the 24th anniversary
of our letter, we are pleased to report that people listened and things are okay now.
Because yeah, I think like, what did one of those things actually come to fruition?
Well, no, totally. And they do mention it. They're like, okay, so here's what they say.
They say, on the 25th anniversary of their call, we look back at their warning and evaluate the
human response by exploring available time series data. Since 1992, with the exception of
stabilizing the stratospheric ozone layer. So yeah, you know, that actually was a problem
that was like, you know, rapidly and radically intervened in. But so with the exception of
stabilizing the stratospheric ozone layer, humanity has failed to make sufficient progress
in generally solving these foreseen environmental challenges. And alarmingly,
most of them are getting far worse. So your powers of prediction are great.
You are correct. It was just one. Yeah, yeah. Okay.
Yeah, that makes sense. I mean, I'm living with some family right now with my
old 90 year old great grandmother and my 12 year old cousin. And, you know, both of them
both of them definitely have some idea of, you know, the threat of the threat of COVID,
as well as for my 12 year old cousin, the threat of, say, touching a hot pan or something like that.
And even, even there, I mean, there's a, you know, there's a direct response
to touching something hot. I keep trying to tell her that she won't be able to use her
hands as she keeps doing it, but she keeps doing it anyway. I mean,
like every warning, like she doesn't really understand until her hand is touching the cast
iron. That's really, really hot. And I mean, that tends to be the way that I think that
people aren't really going to, that they will artificially limit their consciousness to avoid
any evidence of these things happening until it's right up there in their face and they're faced with
natural disaster. I mean, no, it's, yeah, it's interesting because there's the, there's the
dimension of like ecological sensibilities and like morality per se, which we're going to talk
about a bunch in this episode, even though the outline I sent you wouldn't have indicated that
at all. But, but then there's also like, yeah, there's just the way that like environmental issues
per se are sort of like intrinsically kind of cognitively not that compelling or whatever.
Like, I mean, like we both lived at 49th Street, right? And, and like, you know, that, that place
has environmental issues, right? It has like all these like mold issues or whatever. And it is
actually, it's been fascinating in my life for all the times I've moved in and out of there and
been like, oh, the mold's too much. How much like, it's not like a value system thing exactly, but
it's just like, it's hard to like grasp and grapple with a problem like that because it's
cumulative, you know, the consequences might be more tomorrow than today. And there's not
like a really sharp line where you're like, now the consequences are too much or like now
we're facing the consequences. You know, it's like, it's fuzzy territory. It's not really anybody's fault.
It is, you know, it's like literally something that's just kind of like,
ambiently happening. It doesn't flip any of those evolutionary switches, like that person
is stealing from me or like, that's a snake and I'm scared of it or some shit like that, you
know, I mean, the evolutionary thing at play is just to adjust to the circumstance here,
right, which is like such a useful tendency, like such a useful capacity of the human mind
until it's the most destructive and terrible capacity of the human mind until until it's
sort of like our doom that was written in from the very beginning. Yeah. Yeah.
So yeah, I mean, that's that's kind of here's here's the crude thesis, we'll do the crude
thesis of the episode here. And then once we've gone through a bunch of scientific findings,
we'll do like the more refined, elegant, rigorous thesis. But yeah, I mean, the crude thesis is
just that science, science communication of this variety has happened a lot, and it really
hasn't gone anywhere. Like it's really just not working out, you know, and that,
but this becomes at a certain point, we have to like, we can talk about this in terms of science
itself, where we can say like, scientists may be building all of these astonishingly elegant,
like hyper sophisticated, conceptually massively integrated, like climate models or ecological
models or whatever, where it's like, they're just like their exquisite acts of synthesis and
analysis and complexity or whatever. But then they're taking the findings from that, that very
like hyper refined and developed kind of science, and sort of feeding them into this paradigm that's
like, well, you know, you just you tell people about the dangers that they face. And because
people are all pretty much rational, and all respond to the kind of variables, and the
kind of framing that we respond to, then society like changes course because of these warnings.
So in other words, they take a bunch of really complex, beautiful science and then feed it into
a strategy that is completely unscientific and has like, that just like literally ignores
the vast majority of the findings about how people actually behave.
Right. I mean, by what right does is scientific authority really upheld,
it can create massive weapons of force, but it doesn't control that force at all.
It completely depends. Yeah, completely depends on external things that are totally rational.
Exactly. So it depends like, like basically the epistemology, like, it depends on,
on the people in power who scientists hand tools to, to be more like scientists than they
actually are, and to like, to be able to like, undergo the same kind of like undertake the
same kind of evaluations, and just really have the same kind of like moral framework, you know,
like to, to think in terms of the same sorts of consequences. So yeah, I mean, like, like you
could say in a way that this is, there's all of these areas where
science will be like accumulating results in one domain, and then accumulating a different set of
results in another domain. And there'll be some like fundamental impediment to progress until
those two domains are synthesized. And, and this is kind of like, to me, this is one of
those things where it's like, there's all these other researchers who are doing this amazing work
looking at the kind of like, the psychological configurations of humanity, and like all the
like different kind of all the different basically like perceptual worlds that humans live in,
and how like some people are receptive to certain messages, and some people aren't,
and you know, like this huge range of variations and like core motivations, and yeah, just like
information that people are responsive to. And then there's all these other scientists
doing all this amazing work, you know, predicting the end of the world,
or observing it at this point. And it's like those, those two domains of science seem to really like
be in desperate need of a synthesis. Yeah, definitely. I have an aunt and uncle that are
a really interesting, really interesting married pair, because she is a doctor of social sciences
with a focus on sustainability, environmental sustainability, but still mostly working in
social sciences, and he's an engineer. It's very interesting to see them speak about,
you know, issues in the world and the different ways that they approach knowledge and, you know,
like what they would, like each one would consider to be objective truth and all of that.
And I think that that kind of represents, you know, like a greater, a greater schism, but
to see it in, to see it in a marriage, I think is a, I'm learning a lot from them.
Yeah, that's interesting. Totally. Okay, so, so after I sent you the false outline, the,
the outline that was discarded for the true outline in the final moments of preparation,
that heresy, the outline, all who gaze upon it are idolaters. But,
but so, you know, like, I was like, okay, I know that there has to be some research out there
that, you know, I, well, okay, I already knew that there was like a few different scales that
psychologists use to essentially assess somebody's like degree to which they like relate to nature,
basically, as a primary like way of seeing things like see themselves as embedded in larger natural
systems, see nature as a part of them themselves as a part of nature, you know, and, and these scales
are politically predictive, like they also, they do tend to like predict how much people
support environmental policy or like would act actively work to establishing it.
So I wanted, I knew that there was like, I knew there were some findings out there about like what,
what high rankings on one of these kind of like nature orientation scales would correlate with.
And so that's kind of what I spent the last few days, I spent the last few days going through
a bunch of that research, but like, do you have any, do you have any like wild guesses or
certain knowledge of like psychological traits that might correspond with tending to like see
yourself as a part of nature? I think that when, like, I definitely think that their,
their indicators as to, for instance, what like what we would talk about in the,
like my younger days working with the international socialists, debating over,
you know, revolution over reform, for instance, or, you know, somebody taking like a pragmatic
approach and working in existing government systems or just wanting to destroy the entire
thing or, you know, kind of apolitical, stateless approaches,
you know, working, working outside of any existing system, but not quite working
toward a revolution or anything like that. But I mean, honestly, I think if somebody wants to
get a good overview of that, they should listen to the first, what was it the first
two or three episodes of your podcast really? I mean, I thought that I really haven't,
I haven't really encountered a better way of putting it than you already have.
All right. But as far as like, so here's, there's a scale, let's see, there's a scale called the
nature relatedness scale, which, yeah, is exactly like I just said, it's like,
some of the questions seem a lot of the time when I read these psychometrics, I'm like,
these questions just seem like a little obtuse. But then they do actually, it's like, but then
the researchers are able to demonstrate that A, they predict real world behavior,
B, they tend to actually predict other people's assessments of the person
doing the responding and the self reporting. And then in some cases, the like gold standard is
like they can also often correlate it with brain activity, you know, and I'm like, all right,
all right, I guess you're convincing me. So the, but yeah, so the nature relatedness scale
asks some like some really, really straightforward questions, like, I see myself as a part of nature
or whatever, you know, like some shit like that. And when I started on this hunt, the one that I was,
well, okay, I'd say two things. The straightforward like psychometric that I was pretty sure
would correlate with a high nature relatedness score was a high score on on a measure of
empathy, right? I feel like there's a pretty intrinsic relationship there.
And then another one that I strongly suspected was that it would it would correlate with scales
that are designed to measure like receptiveness to mystical experiences and stuff like that,
which there's, you know, like there's that there's that scale that's just called the
mystical openness to mystical experience scale or something like that mystical orientation
scale, I forget. So I did I did find pretty good evidence in both cases that the empathy thing was
some of the first stuff that came up in the psychometric literature.
And so yeah, and so this is interesting because
you know, it's like the problem as it's framed in a lot of science communication is like supposedly
people just don't understand like, like in some kind of like technical sense, like they just haven't
been exposed to the information, they just don't understand what scientists are saying, or it's
like, they don't understand the gravity of the consequences, like, we have to find another way
to say, we're all going to fucking die that people like can really grasp viscerally, you
know, and it's a little like what I what I have always thought is that that's just sort of basically
not true. And that people who are really responsive to ecological messaging are such because they
have a basic tendency to perceive the world in terms of interconnection and to perceive
fewer boundaries between themselves and the rest of existence. And that even though there's like
all these very obvious things that clearly everybody does care about that you can cite that
are like consequences of ecological collapse, like there won't be food on the grocery store shelves.
I don't I don't think that's I think that the ultimate motivations or the ultimate
psychological framework really does have a lot more to do with with interconnection
than with like a categorical assessment of the consequences and a desire to avoid them
per se. I think that desire is a really important thing to point out as well because a lot of people
say, you know, large groups of people who assume kind of a like a dualistic approach to mind and
body or the divine and material and assume or take a position of the immediacy of I don't know
what one would call like a spiritual experience over material circumstances.
I mean, you know, say like people who supported Trump because they believe that he's the antichrist
who is going to usher in the end of the world. Although I don't know, maybe there's a vast
scientific conspiracy behind behind their sort of anti-mask protests, trying to eradicate all of
these irrational people or something like that so that we can move forward with the big business of
correcting climate change. I actually know somebody who works in like super high levels
of climate policy like organizes panels for like, you know, the UN, the like the COP conference of
parties and all that when coronavirus hit and started showing its demographic patterns. Like
it's like, yeah, it kills older people who are more set in their ways or whatever. They were
like, this is the first time that I've really been tempted to believe in God.
I mean, you know, a similar thought crossed my mind right off the bat, of course.
Yeah, I think a lot of us were there in one way or the other.
Yeah, so I don't know. So I checked out this scale, this empathy scale, one of the most common,
maybe the most commonly used one called the interpersonal reactivity index. And yeah,
has has pretty strong correlations with with the nature relatedness scale. And it's interesting,
like the the interpersonal reactivity index has like these few sub scales in it.
So often with the psychometric stuff, I feel like it's definitely measuring something real that does
like legitimately vary between people. But often the constructs themselves feel a little like crude,
like it's like where what should you lump together with what and all you really have is statistics.
But you know, there can be so many so much co variation between some of these domains,
you often wonder if something should be in one scale rather than another or whatever. But
because the IRI has questions that are really trivially obvious that you would expect an
empathy scale that have like, I experienced personal distress when I see somebody suffering
kind of shit. But then it also it also has all these questions that are just about the degree of
like the degree to which you live like a rich mental life where you get carried away and
things that aren't happening, you know, so like a bunch of the questions are like,
I really get involved with the feelings of the character in a novel, or like,
I am usually objective when I watch a movie or play and don't often get completely caught
up in it. You know, so there's these other these kind of other like psychographic aspects of all this
that the IRI measures. But but yeah, apparently, even if you break it down into the sub scales,
most of them correlate pretty damn strongly with with the nature relatedness scale.
And so the authors of one paper that I read phrase it simply, this pattern supports the
possibility that there is at least some link between a person's ability to connect with
the experience of others, and that person's overall sense of connection to the natural world.
And I think that, you know, like, going through a bunch of like bio theory and
like this kind of stuff. It's like you often pass through this landscape are really sophisticated,
like, oh, here we are talking about what different brain structures do to like contribute to different
types of behavior or whatever. But then at the very end, you get somewhere that's kind of like
breathtakingly simple and that like most lay people would be like, oh, yeah, that sounds
probably like it's true, you know, it's a pretty good example, like, sure, okay.
So, you know, a person's ability to connect with others, and their sense of connection with the
natural world, deeply related. Okay, the big five personality inventory, right, agreeableness,
openness, conscientiousness, all that stuff, ocean, any guesses about any of those that might
be positively correlated with the nature, high scores on the nature relatedness scale.
Let's see. Let's say agreeableness. I mean, you know, just, just because, you know, what immediately
comes to mind is this sort of like contrary in nature of reactionaries,
particular. Yeah, I mean, that's the first one that comes to my mind.
Yeah, you're right. So agreeableness does, does correlate with nature relatedness.
The one that has the strongest correlation, and this is interesting, I think that this measures
something very, very important and predictive of many, like, many like really significant
aspects of human behavior that vary. But so like openness to experience
is, is like very strongly predictive of nature relatedness. And so like, you know, that's also
of all the like most conventionally used, like the kind of like commonly used psychometrics that
are out there, you know, you're taking a fucking like, which Harry Potter character are you
quiz. And ultimately, it's like, they're using some of this like openness to experience
also just predicts like voting behavior in the United States, and any other psychometric that
that isn't like politically specific that people have come up with. So that's interesting.
Seems pretty fundamental to like a more cooperative attitude anyway, or, you know,
just the more, the more socially minded politics, sort of political casts.
Yeah, I mean, that's right. That's exactly it is that there's there's just something very fundamental
there in our like, in our behavioral perceptual systems, where it's like,
where the more receptive one is to something that one hasn't like already established and defined
as like a safe or acceptable form of behavior or experience. Yeah, like, like the less,
the less rigid a lot of the lines that they want to draw, you know, between different social groups
and stuff like that are like, yeah, it just really seems like, like what we're talking about when we
talk about variation and like hierarchical worldview and stuff like that is like very,
very intimately and inextricably wrapped up in a biology that promotes or diminishes
you know, engagement with novelty, like new the seeking of new experience.
Or suddenly making an about face because, you know, this, what was once sort of an abstract threat.
You know, say, say maybe relating to health care, something like that, you know, suddenly,
suddenly supporting something because it is directly affected your life, but not being able to
really not not supporting it before that. Yeah, right. It's not necessary. Yeah.
Right. Yeah. No, we're like, yeah, that's a good point. Like I think that sure, openness to new
experience probably has like something to do on some level with one's ability to simply
mentally model what it's like to have an experience that you haven't had before. And
so one would expect like in that basic sense that openness to experience and empathy would in fact
have like a strong degree of relationship and they do, you know, but yeah. Yeah, that's a good point.
Of course. Otherwise, it's sort of not exactly empathy. I mean, you know, like,
you're not really putting yourself in someone else's shoes if it's just sort of playing
off of experiences that you've already had. I don't really think it's the same exact
process going on. Yeah, exactly. Exactly. There's right. There's two different things there,
for sure. And ultimately, we live in a far too complex world for everybody to like base
what they think, you know, for everybody to base ones like socio political perspectives
exclusively off of the shit that's actually happened to you. I mean, which is so much like
that's so much of the current like left Identitarian framework is like,
all that matters is what you personally know. And I'm like,
yeah, but then what do we do collectively? Like the world is so complex. Nobody knows
what happened to everybody else. Like we should try to communicate. Yeah. I mean,
it's so like you can already operate under the, you know, under that assumption,
you know, just just make it ahead of time and then figure out, figure out like how how you're
supposed to cooperate or or you know, like what you could work on together anyway. Right, right,
you know. Okay, then I found I found this other paper that was called connectedness is in my
character the relationship between nature relatedness and character strengths. And this was like this
whole I had never I had never heard of these psychometrics before. And apparently, again,
this is one of those things like often when I read these things at first, I'm like, this just seems
kind of like, I don't know just seems like a little obtuse, like a little heavy handed somehow.
And I was like, what is this really measured? Is this measure anything?
Apparently, you know, as I read through the paper, you know, like apparently it does at
least it's all based on self reporting. But they've done studies where they,
you know, took the self reporting and then asked people who knew the study participants
to rate them along the same dimensions. And there was like pretty decent agreement,
you know, so I'm like, All right, all right. But yeah, so this like, this is like this crazy
the way that these psychometrics came into being was by doing by people trying to do
like a cross cultural assessment of of traits that are considered like good, like are considered
virtues cross culturally like in every, you know, every society they could find documentation of.
And I'm like, huh, that's, that's, that's a wild like place to start in some ways. But,
you know, they found a bunch. So it's like, obviously, this, like,
this list of CS characteristics is huge. It's like humor, curiosity, bravery, teamwork,
creativity, like on and fucking on and on and on. But they found in general,
that the score, you know, like that these CS scores, these character strength scores
did in fact positively correlate with nature relatedness. And then they,
the CS scale has a bunch of like, it has a bunch of factors like a bunch of sub scales that it's
comprised of. And the one, the one that they found had the strongest relationship with nature relatedness
were like the intellectual character strengths, the ones that were like curiosity and like
analytical, like an analytical nature and stuff like that. So, you know, all right,
there's, there's some more stuff that some more innate variation that maps out to ecological
perspective. So we're already kind of naturally or almost universally scientifically minded in a way.
I totally think so. I mean, I, I'm gonna actually the next episode that we do like
this, I want to talk about exactly that. Like I want to talk about the ways in which everybody
is always doing science. And I don't know like, how, how like the idea of science as like a,
a formally distinct process of inquiry, then the processes of inquiry that allow us to like
know where our car is parked or something is like sort of, it's sort of an illusory distinction,
you know, like there, like science like really does just sort of formalize basic reasoning processes
that like logic technically exist even in magical thinking, you know, like there's,
there's some exactly by analyzing it, you could find some underlying framework or machinery behind
it, you know, identify it, quantify it in a way. Well, yeah, that's exactly it. And I guess I feel
like I've had all these conversations with people who I, who I share some like values or some worldview
with where they're like, yeah, I just, I just believe like, I just believe science is like
false headed. It's like, it's a cultural construct. And like, you know, it's all,
it's all completely contingent. And there are other equally valid ways of seeing and I'm like,
okay. So when you say that, are you saying, you know, like, are you saying that there's something
you can point to that science is wrong about? Because if you are, you're actually doing science,
not critiquing science itself, like any, like the moment that you get into that where you're
like, well, science said that like, this type of behavior is psychotic, but it's actually like,
it's actually something people are culturally conditioned to and it's healthy and adaptive
in this culture. I'm like, okay, that too is a scientific statement. You're saying that you have
some evidence and you made some inferences, you know, like it's inescapable. And science isn't,
you know, like a monolithic or like organization, you know, there's so many different schools
of thought for any subject is like, particularly in the social sciences and people, I mean, it's,
it's totally fundamental to, I don't know, like scientific authority to have all of these competing
arguments. And yeah, I mean, they don't all agree with each other. It's not like that church or
something. Yeah, no, exactly. Like that's, I mean, right, that's, that's often just like the one
liner thing that I say when I have these conversations with people is as I'm like,
I feel like you think science is a particular set of conclusions and beliefs as opposed to
a method of inquiry. It's because it is to them. And it right, it is to them to them something about
them. Yeah, fair. There may be an element of projection and all of this, I don't believe in
science because it's a rigid set of conclusions that have been arrived at previous to any meaningful
analysis. Okay, yeah, so, so this other researcher, this is actually like a
this was somebody's PhD thesis. So I guess in a sense, this didn't make it all the way through,
I don't think they published a subsequent paper. So technically, this isn't science in the sense
that it made it all the way through a full on rigorous review, like peer review process. But
I don't know, somebody's thesis advisor signed off on it anyway. That's pretty rigorous. Yeah.
And that's pretty, yeah, that's pretty rigorous. This is this is definitely is definitely
digressive. But have we ever talked about, like, there's that whole at this point, it's like,
there's a non trivial number of scientific papers out there that were published in journals that
were written as a joke. Just to show that it's not exactly impossible to get nonsense
through the peer review process. And the one that was like, I mean, like, they encompass a wide
range of like different degrees of plausibility, like, you know, appealing to different like,
academic biases or whatever. But the one where I was like, All right, you guys win,
you guys win the fake science paper contest, were these kids who put to get they did like
a literal mashup, like just a straight up copy paste job of a biochem paper and a geology paper,
like even the title, the old cut up method, totally like some straight up like burrows,
and they sent it to a journal and it got accepted.
That's, that's not a good look.
So that's, so that's amazing.
Bad optics for science.
Okay, so this, this lady's doctoral thesis looks at this other psychometric,
the trait emotional intelligence questionnaire, which is exactly what it sounds like in inquiry
into the extent to which one, you know, is like aware of other people's emotional states and one's
own and good at in some sense, managing or regulating both or either. So, you know,
has questions like expressing my emotions with words is not a problem for me,
stuff like that. And again, this is another one of those ones where the assessments of people who
know the people involved in the study match up pretty well with the self assessment. So,
we can imagine, you know, that's some, some decent attestation of its validity.
So yeah, so testing a narcissist until you say, Oh yeah, I'm good at everything.
Yeah, exactly. That's why you first give them the narcissistic personality inventory.
But yeah, so, so okay, so high, high EI high emotional intelligence scores
do in fact correlate with high nature relatedness scores.
And so she, she hypothesized that they would be positively associated because of some
what she calls an underlying general connectedness factor. So exactly like I was saying, like,
that all of these different psychometrics, you know, they get, they get categorized,
however they get categorized, but that like a bunch of them are ultimately measuring some,
some degree to which people do or do not experience a general sense of like,
unity with all existence or like whatever other mystical cliche one wishes to traffic in,
in that these, you know, that these are like, what is actually predictive of one's ecological
worldview, as opposed to the extent to which one has been told by a scientist, there will be
massive unprecedented suffering. And so okay, and so then like, this is the,
this is the one where you would expect this to go because the universal psychedelic experience,
you know, like the universal mystic experiences tends to be one of like the dissolution of
borders and the sense of the integration of self into a much broader framework of reality,
often accompanied by a sense of like, loss of fear of death or the insignificance of one's,
you know, own unique concerns and anxieties. And so I found this paper
called a psychedelics personality and political perspectives. And so it measures that it's like,
it's like every conversation you've ever heard where somebody is like, yeah, I know if the whole
world, I mean, I don't think people have these conversations as much now as they used to, but like,
if the whole world did psychedelics, then we wouldn't have war or whatever, like,
probably overstating the case, but it does in fact turn out that the more psychedelics
people have done and the higher they rank, the degree of ego dissolution that they experienced
during their most intense psychedelic experiences, the higher they rank on nature relatedness and
the more egalitarian of a worldview they have. So there is something there, you know,
to identify themselves as, you know, getting away from their individual ego to the big eye,
that is everything. Yeah, fucking exactly. So see, it's like some kind of elusive pattern
macrocosm and in the microcosm. Exactly. People tend to, I think they tend to analyze
their psychedelic experiences in ways that they might not analyze their non psychedelic
experiences of everyday life. So I mean, I've been reading a lot of, or I've been going through
the complete works of Sigmund Freud lately, and kind of getting into psychoanalysis. And I think
that's kind of the primary thing that I want to take out of it is just the process of analysis,
you know, like finding, taking whatever imagery is coming up in your consciousness and just kind
of analyzing it. So you go through one image into the next one into the next one until you
sort of find the initial instance that would be the sort of like causal situation to some
neurosis that you have or something like that. And yeah, I mean, that seems to be kind of like a
big factor in that you have like a really crazy dream or something, you know, in the same way,
like you're just going to analyze it more because it's more bizarre and doesn't really match
the everyday mundane experiences that you have. Yeah, that does make a lot of sense. I guess
right. Yeah, that seems that seems like a fair statement, like two dimensions of the psychedelic
experience, both of which would push you in that direction, you know, like, because certainly
there is just like that, like it's the intrinsic nature of the experience for sure. But yeah,
I guess, I guess that is true. People tend to be much more introspective, like they actually,
they're actually paying attention to their thought processes themselves when they're like,
wow, my mind was just completely fucking blown by those. Yeah, that makes sense.
All right, here's the last here. Here's the last psychometric that this was,
this is from a paper that was written well before the nature, all these other papers,
the correlations were with the NR scale. This was written way before the NR scale came into
existence. But it's just so fun. It was some, some metric called the environmental
responsiveness inventory. And they were looking at all these different personality traits and
like subscales of their own scale and stuff. So I found this table, this is from like the 70s.
Maybe, maybe it's not the methodologically greatest thing that anybody ever came up with.
And I just really don't know. It's just kind of old enough that normally I wouldn't cite it
except that it's just, I just think that this list is delightful. So here's a list from,
from one of their subscales from their stimulation seeking subscale
of like, of questions that they would ask, strong agreement with which would in their assessment
correlate with, with like a strong degree of like ecological worldview or perceiving one's
self as part of nature. I would enjoy traveling around the world in a sailing ship. I like
to ride on roller coasters. I like experimental art. I would enjoy driving a racing car. And then
the clincher for me, alleys are interesting places to explore. I like that question a lot.
I love that question. So I'm keeping that as a conversation starter now. Exactly. So do you
explore alleys much? I also feel like I'm like, well, y'all nailed it. Like, it's been a whole
life of defending ecosystems and exploring alleys for me. It's been a whole life of defending ecosystems
and exploring alleys for me. It's been a whole life of defending ecosystems and exploring alleys for
me. It's been a whole life of defending ecosystems and exploring alleys for me. Well, friends,
we are going to leave Evan a nice conversation there for the time being. There will be sequels
and say that's an episode of Fight Like an Animal, the only podcast that is both at the
intersection of biology and politics and from the future. Find the bibliography for this episode
at AgainstTheInternet.com. I'm behind on my bibliographies, but it will be there.
Find me on Patreon, patreon.com, biological singularity if you want to keep me in coffee and books
and the few things I need for this podcast that I can't steal from the internet.
Find me on Twitter. Crazy to think that we've all been wasting time on Twitter for 35 years now.
And find hours and hours more of conversation between Tom and I than there was the last
time I mentioned it on the From Alpha to Omega podcast. There are now five episodes up
where we are having a very sprawling, epic, engaging conversation. Okay, talk again soon, friends.