Title: Group Mind pt 5 Everybody Loves a Narcissist
Episode #: 26
Episode ID: 8089413
Source: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/8089413-group-mind-pt-5-everybody-loves-a-narcissist.mp3
------------------------------------------------------------

=== EPISODE METADATA ===
Generated: 2026-01-12 01:02:07
Episode ID: 6200365
MP3 File: 6200365-the-nine-elders-and-the-ancient-scroll-a-constitutional-crisis-comedy-special.mp3
Title: The Nine Elders and the Ancient Scroll: A Constitutional Crisis Comedy Special
Podcast/Artist: Against the Internet
Album/Series: Fight Like An Animal
Source URL: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/6200365-the-nine-elders-and-the-ancient-scroll-a-constitutional-crisis-comedy-special.mp3
========================
Greetings friends, I'm Arnold Schroeder and this is the Nine Elders in the Ancient Scroll,
a constitutional crisis mini-special of fight like an animal.
As election conflict amplifies all of the existing conflicts raging throughout this
society, I think there's one thing we can all agree on, regardless of our political perspective.
It's that the very worst thing that could happen, the very worst crisis that could emerge from a
landscape of profound and converging crises, would be for our society to no longer take
guidance from the Nine Wise and Elders and their interpretation of the Ancient Scroll.
On this point, Democrats and Republicans are unanimous. If someone is trying to steal the
election, then what they're doing is unconstitutional. The theft of an election might have many terrible
consequences. The nature of the perceived consequences varies by political faction.
Perhaps democracy will die. Perhaps the earth itself will die.
Perhaps a cabal of child sacrificing pedophiles will finally have the power they need to end
Christmas. But there is a consensus that these terrible consequences are best not described
in their own terms, and solutions sought in their own terms. But in terms of the
deviation, any one of these developments would represent from the guidance of the Ancient Scroll,
as interpreted by the Nine Elders. Of course, it is sometimes tempting to think that because
none of these problems existed when the Ancient Scroll was first inscribed with the Sacred
Calligraphy, because there was no question of what to do about global ecological collapse,
or exit polls no longer predicting election results ever since computers started counting
votes, or international pedophile rings operating out of pizza restaurants.
The Ancient Scroll may not provide the best guidance on these matters.
But this anxiety is, of course, based on a grave underestimation of the wisdom and foresight
of the very powerful Magi who wrote the Sacred Calligraphy.
You see, the very powerful Magi who founded this country had magical powers that not even the Nine
Elders possess. One can see this clearly in their Sacred Vestments. The dictionary defines
a vestment as a garment, especially a ceremonial or official robe. And this definition goes a
long way to conveying the sacred, oracular power the very powerful Magi imbued the Ancient Scroll
with for future generations of the Nine Elders, who they knew would possess a lesser magic.
While the Nine Elders certainly have very ornate ritual robes to wear when they consult
the Sacred Calligraphy, they do not have the ritual wigs of the very powerful Magi,
who are sometimes also called the Ancient Fathers, the Eternal Patriarchs, or simply the
First Fathers, or Founding Fathers. This is like the difference between a wizard who has a pointy
misshapen hat and one who does not. The former is manifestly, from a cursory glance, more powerful.
The differences between the Republicans and the Democrats are important to note.
The Republicans think that the Ancient Fathers gave the Nine Elders the Ancient Scroll in order to
interpret it largely in terms of an even more sacred text, the Ancient Desert Scroll, which
describes the hallucinatory experiences of slaveholders in an endless, unforgiving desert.
The Republicans believe any society which does not take guidance on the Ancient Scroll
from the Ancient Desert Scroll will descend into chaos, as it provides protocols for stoning
women to death who come near to male-only ritual objects when they are menstruating,
as well as on dividing women up to be raped after the conquest of a city.
The Democrats, on the other hand, think this is barbaric, archaic nonsense.
They take what they describe as a far more enlightened, progressive approach, based on reason
and universal human principles illuminated by science. They think it's ridiculous to base
society on the sacred utterances of a few people who lived millennia ago, when you can
base society on the sacred utterances of a few people who lived mere centuries ago.
Before nuclear weapons and electronic surveillance existed, but crucially,
after, it was established that people near the Baltic Sea don't turn into wolves periodically,
and that most afflictions suffered by cows aren't the result of invisible arrows shot by elves.
It's a good thing we have people like the Democrats and the Republicans to manage our
lives and structure our society, because it's easy to see how some people would fail to
understand that these are the only two reasonable choices. Some people might draw the hasty conclusion
that the ancient scroll says nothing whatsoever about, say, the methane hydrates which have
begun to rise from the ocean floor into the atmosphere in a repeat of a scenario that has
previously resulted in mass extinction. I myself, in my panic about this situation,
might conclude that the ancient scroll offers far clearer guidance on dealing with piracy,
and the correct fraction of a person's slaves should be counted as for tax purposes
than it does on mass extinction. But you can tell I have no idea what I'm talking about
just by looking at me. I not only lack the ritual wig of the first fathers,
but I lack as well the sacred raiment of the nine elders to whom they entrusted the ancient scroll.
It is only by their inscrutable wisdom that they are able to translate what might appear to the
rest of us to be meaningless, outmoded gibberish into the only correct perspective on life as
we know it today. This is why it is so dire to enter a period of constitutional crisis.
A constitutional crisis is a crisis of the ancient scroll, so called because the magic
with which the founding sorcerers imbued it is what constitutes our very being. But as powerful
as this magic is, it can be weakened. Then the nine elders may have trouble knowing the
one true interpretation of the ancient scroll, and succumb to the errors to which the
uninitiated are subject, such as making decisions based on personal opinion.
Perhaps more than at any other time in the flawless history of this nation,
the power of the ancient scroll seems to be weakening. Some even mutter, beneath smoke-filled
skies which obscure the sun, that the scroll is dying. If this is true, then with it will die
any hope for the wise conduct of human affairs. We have already lost too many other ancient
institutions and their sacred laws. Had we not, we could have had even more ancient and powerful
magic to guide us through these difficult times. For instance, had the druids endured,
they could have continued to not only preside over the sacrifice of human and animal victims alike
in a giant wicker man that they set on fire, but also could have decided when a tech company
meets the formal criteria for a monopoly, based on laws established well before sacred
life was breathed into the ancient scroll. But now, it is all we have. All that stands between us
and chaos. Many attempts have been made to restore the scroll's magic. Many sacrifices have been made
to the cruel eagle god whose bloodthirsty rites were performed by the magi when the scroll was
inscribed. The cruel eagle god who can be seen wielding his thunderbolts and arrows on a dollar
bill, the instrument by which his insatiable bloodlust is fed. Now, it is we who must sacrifice.
We have no hope but to kill one another in the streets. Again, it might seem like a better idea
to those with less subtle forms of wisdom to say, if it has come to this point, that the
ancient scroll has simply failed as a basis for a society, that we should perhaps walk away
and find new ways to live. Such misguided reasoning may lead one, for instance, to say that in a
nation of such profound disagreements, perhaps we shouldn't all try to live by one set of rules,
or that we are clearly so unhappy with the decisions that are being made for us,
that perhaps we should start making our own decisions. There could be no greater cataclysm.
This nation has enslaved people and almost launched nuclear weapons on multiple occasions,
and put more people in cages than any society in history, and pushed ecosystems past the
point of breaking, undermining the viability of the entire human enterprise. And that all
might be bad, but I think we can all agree none of it is a crisis. Not a crisis in the truly
grave sense in which a faltering of the magical powers of the ancient scroll is a crisis.
No matter what, this magic must be restored, and the nation on which it is founded must continue.