Title: Group Mind pt 6 Suburban Holy War
Episode #: 28
Episode ID: 8291954
Source: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/8291954-group-mind-pt-6-suburban-holy-war.mp3
------------------------------------------------------------

=== EPISODE METADATA ===
Generated: 2026-01-12 01:02:07
Episode ID: 5994721
MP3 File: 5994721-a-model-political-program-for-ecological-survival.mp3
Title: Untitled Episode
Podcast/Artist: Against the Internet
Album/Series: Fight Like An Animal: Biology and Politics
Source URL: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/5994721-a-model-political-program-for-ecological-survival.mp3
========================
Greetings friends, I'm Arnold Schroeder and this is Fight Like An Animal, the podcast where
we cite research on crack dealers, how childhood trauma affects brain structure, and the social
developmental context to elephants and related all to civil war. That was the last episode.
And that bibliography, which I am particularly proud of among my many, I think fairly eclectic
bibliographies, which demonstrate a considerable pension for synthesis, I'm particularly proud
of the elephants, what elephants can teach us about civil war bibliography. So if you want
to find that bibliography, it's at against the internet.com. There is no bibliography
for this episode really. But I am basing this largely on reading a text that can be
found at the website. And you know, follow me on Twitter, tell all your friends, rate
and review the podcast. These are some of the things that I've learned to say as a master
of podcast promotion. So I shouldn't I really, I mean, I'm going to listen to this once
I've slept and see if this is really the kind of thing that I want to give to the
world. I probably shouldn't be doing this episode right now in the state that I'm in. I'm radically
under slept, but I'm driving to Portland tomorrow. And I'll be there for a few days doing things
other than making podcasts. And this has been a little too long. As always, I have a little
bit of trouble predicting my own, like my own output. I thought that this episode wasn't
something I saw coming anytime particularly soon. And I have a bunch of other episodes
that are like, essentially done or like very, very close to, you know, like being ready
to record that for some reason, I have just set aside to do this. And that's that's
life. But this will realize this. What I'm talking about today relies heavily on my
actual experience organizing. And I would say that this is one of the less this will
be one of the least like explicitly will be centering our inquiry in like biology or
psychology, you know, anything explicitly like related to that. But although we will talk
about evolved psychological needs and human nature and and whether our civilization accommodates
it in the course of talking about these policies, because you know, I mean, whatever illustrates
the point that you actually, you actually can't escape this stuff when you're just
trying to do concrete policy work, or like you're trying to do direct action, you're
trying to achieve some outcome in the external world, this stuff about like variation
in assessments of human nature, or the willingness to even engage with the idea of human
nature at all, which of course is a logical prequisite for assessing variations in people's
estimates of what human nature is. You know, like these things really actually totally
fucking matter in a huge way to are in turn in, in terms of like real world
situations with with significant outcomes. So we're going to talk about my my components of a
model political program for ecological survival. That's the title of the piece.
Where are you going, kid?
Get a drink of water?
Yeah, sit down and drink this. Water's not good.
Just here, everywhere, everywhere.
Yeah, you never know where the toxins are going to repeat.
Okay, step one, climate plans are nonsense, but read them anyway.
You likely won't find many solutions worth fighting for in these documents, but they
nonetheless will provide you with an inventory of greenhouse gas emissions, and
therefore some sense of what must be shut down.
One interesting approach to take is to look at emissions in terms of economic
activity that meets a real human need and therefore should persist in some
modified form and what economic activity can simply be discarded.
The Portland climate action plan illustrates this point painfully well.
It's a bizarre literary creation, much more than a strategy to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions. The individual actions, if that's what we want to call them in
the plan would be extremely tedious to examine individually.
But let's use the plan's 63 unique actions on transportation to
illustrate the general uselessness of this particular document and indeed, all
other instances of the experimental literary genres sometimes called
infographic technodistopianism and sometimes called climate planning.
All but nine of the Portland CAPS transportation items fall into four
categories. 11 consists solely of expressing support for another plan or
policy, for instance, support implementation of a federal fuel standard,
right, just supporting something that the federal government would do.
21 of these actions consists solely of other plans, putative measures or
planning processes and policies which do not currently exist.
So for instance, include carbon targets in update to Portland transportation
system plan. 11 of these of this plan's actions are merely efforts to
increase modeling accuracy or information availability for some aspect of
the economy. So for instance, make data available to improve real time
information about transportation options. Okay. And then 11 of these actions are
sufficiently intangible to describe a tremendous range of actions or very
conceivably none at all. So for instance, maybe my favorite, recognize
the role of goods delivery in supporting healthy, vibrant, industrial
districts. Yeah. So what all of these items have in common is that they
utterly fail to describe any concrete change in the physical world. This is
not by accident. And it goes a long way toward explaining how policies like
California and Oregon and cities like Portland and Seattle have spent
decades releasing climate plans describing declining emissions while
actual emissions here in corporeal reality continue to rise. The
remaining nine items in the Portland caps transportation section are while
tangible, simply ridiculous things like smart traffic lights, which the
plan's authors perhaps mercifully have neglected to associate with any
quantitative measure of emissions decline. But even if the actual
strategies in climate plans are ridiculous, reading them will give
you a sense of what strategies are really necessary. Probably most
importantly, they will give you a detailed emissions inventory. So if you
live in a progressive polity, read its climate plan. If you don't, there may
be no climate plan. If that's the case, I recommend reading one that
applies to an area similar to where you live and also just looking at
greenhouse gas inventory protocols. There are many out there, including
some that were developed by the federal government to be applied by like
cities and states and counties. So they contain really explicit
instruction for how to look at a political unit and inventory. Its
greenhouse gas is looking at economic data, you know, things like
that.
Yeah, you never know where the toxins are going to creep in. Well,
lived in a house that was built on a house or just waste of last
April, she had a baby and it was born with no years. No years.
Okay, step two, recognize that for all the complexity of the
economy, its physical infrastructure is very finite. On
April 21, 2019, some people blockaded the train tracks leading
to a facility that transports tar sands oil, transferring it off
of train cars and onto ships. The facility was located in a major
industrial corridor in Northwest Portland on the
Wallamette River, populated by many similarly dubious
enterprises. Let's use this particular blockade and the
strategies associated with it as the model for a much more
general political program. The first point I want to make about
this blockade is one of scale. Faced with the reality of
ecological collapse already well underway. It's difficult to
see the point in taking any particular action toward any
finite goal. I think this is a consequence of how the liberal
and progressive establishment has framed climate action as a
set of manipulations of end uses rather than origins. If the
problem is burning of transportation fuel, they
insist the answer must be to give developers money for compact
development and hope people drive less as a result, rather than
simply ceasing the flow of transportation fuel. Okay, but all
of Portland's gasoline comes from one pipeline, which
originates at a refinery in Anacorta's Washington. There's
a valve on this pipeline. What's a good rate of reduction in
emissions? I like 10% a year. We could take the Portland climate
action plan approach, smart traffic lights, whatever that
means financial incentives for developers, commissions to study
expanding public transportation, etc, etc, and see where that goes.
Or we could just close the valve 10% per year. We might
call this latter approach a climate policy. We might call
the approaches described in the climate action plan adaptations
to climate policy. Those in power have very deliberately
confused adaptations to climate policy for climate policy
itself. But even still, as ice shells the size of states
plummet into the acidifying ocean and forests burn off more
carbon than they store, it can seem a little pointless to
win victories at the scale of Portland, Oregon. Even if the
victories are of the truly transformational variety. But the
point about the pipeline applies well beyond the boundaries of
the city and the emissions that the boundaries of the city
represent. Fossil fuels are transported by four different
modes. Road, pipeline, train, and ship. Preventing their
transport at any point in these networks is just as good as
preventing it anywhere else. The facility that was blockaded
in April 2019 transports crude oil to refineries all over
the west coast. The transportation networks that run
through the city are responsible for coal burned in China,
lumber sold in Arizona, dynamite used to blow the tops off of
mountains in West Virginia, and ships used to offshore drill
for oil in the Arctic. And there aren't viable
alternatives to pipelines, railroads, and rivers.
One can't simply circumvent Portland by any of these means.
So radical transformations at a very local scale can have a
global impact. No ears. Yeah, I know these people without a
baby that was born with two rows of teeth on top.
All right, number three. Communicate an explicit
concrete vision for declining emissions to zero.
When the blockade was initiated, a small subset of those
involved sent a communication to the city council and mayor
of Portland, as well as to the media, announcing the
rezoning of the industrial corridor. For years, the
city government had been claiming there was nothing it
could do about this oil translating facility. The
powerful when faced with something they don't want to
do often claim they are powerless. We demonstrated
an extremely simple action that would end the facility's
existence with the application of an existing policy
mechanism. Forest Park, the nation's largest urban forest,
is the result of zoning, as is the industrial nightmare
immediately adjacent to it, in which the facility that we
blockaded is situated. So the actual work involved in this
project consisted of reading through the zoning code,
which is well over a thousand pages, but the vast
majority of it was mercifully irrelevant. Clicking a few
buttons in Photoshop to replace one color with another on an
existing zoning map and writing a few paragraphs
describing the allowed uses in the zoning designations.
So we said in our in our communication with the city
and with the media, as reflected on our revised
zoning map, the base zone designation for the
Willamette River Northwest Industrial Corridor,
currently occupied by a number of bulk fossil fuel
terminals, heavy manufacturing sites, and a major railroad
yard, has been changed from 140 Employment and
Industrial Zone to 100 Open Space Zone. The previously
allowed use categories of warehouse and freight
movement, wholesale sales, industrial service,
bulk fossil fuel terminal, and railroad yards
are now prohibited. The manufacturing and production
use, which is currently allowed, becomes a limited
conditional use under the new designation. This type of
communication achieves a few different things. Oh, and by
the way, I mean, if you want to see the map, you know,
go to the website and read the piece, but the description
is pretty sufficient, you know, there's like some
blotches that are one color in the previous one,
they're a different color in the one we set up.
Okay, so this type of communication achieves a few
different things. Probably most importantly, it
communicates an explicit vision for taking out a very
significant portion of the city's contribution to the
ecological crisis, with one very palpably simple
action. Contrary to everything found in the
Kafka-esque, I guess I'll use that term, labyrinth of
institutional climate planning, this action is easy
to describe in concrete terms and easy for people to
mentally model based as it is on an understanding of
finite infrastructure rather than the infinite
complexity of end uses like liberal climate policy
wants us to constantly be thinking of. It's almost
impossible to overstate the extent to which climate
politics are intransigent in part because people
simply cannot imagine a world without the
destructive enterprises on which our lives are
currently based. So tangibly communicating this world
is primary among the tasks and burdens of the
ecological revolutionary or however one chooses to
consider themselves. Cheese, some kind of monster.
Yeah, just think by the year 2000 it'll be one big chemical wasteland.
Alright, step four, never be agnostic on the
relationship between your climate policy platform and the
struggle for power. So another important aspect of this
blockade and its associated communication is that we
told of a policy change rather than asking for one.
To say we are enforcing this policy change with a
blockade, while communicating the terms of actual
policy mechanisms to actual policymakers is to begin
establishing the foundations of a parallel institution
and thus of the kind of wholesale sociopolitical
transformation one might call revolutionary. One of the
ways I find easiest to convince people who don't
identify as revolutionary of the necessity of
revolutionary transformation is to talk about the
archaic outmoded nature of existing institutions and
protocols. You know, since it's been in the news so much
the Supreme Court and the fucking Constitution are two
great examples. The idea that a tiny cabal of
wise and elders should consult a document written
hundreds of years ago in ornate fucking calligraphy
on on parchment no less right and and consult that
document for guidance on nuclear energy,
electronic mass surveillance, climate change
and a host of other issues that simply didn't exist when the
document was written and you know like the fact that they
should do this in ritual robes is it as absurd a
paradigm for establishing the terms on which a society
operates as one could hope to encounter. So faced with the
reality of institutions which aren't viable we should
simply make institutions that are and with respect to
the climate crisis one particularly noteworthy
archaism is the lack in almost every political
jurisdiction of a climate department. I mean considering
the minutiae of government activity that does need a
dedicated department, municipal elections bureaus,
parks and recreation agencies and so on it's
truly ridiculous for progressive politicians to
promise to completely restructure every aspect of the
economy to respect ecological limits without some kind of
staffed, funded entity dedicated to doing so.
Thus in some sense the work of writing and enforcing
your own climate policy is the work of a parallel
institution but in some sense the work really has no
parallel it's an act of establishing and
modeling a necessary reality and the creation of such
dual power situations is of course the work of broader
social transformation without which climate survival
is impossible. Political reality and physical reality
have nothing to do with one another. There is real
power in staking out a position that acknowledges
physical reality at the expense of political reality
and simply declaring the position legitimate.
I've written in the past about the earth-first wilderness
proposal of the 1980s like me with my zoning map
these agitators simply put a bunch of big black
blotches on a map of the United States and said
I imagine with some glee we're fighting for these areas to be off
limits to all development and for existing development to be decommission
and I mean like some of these wilderness areas went through
major cities and stuff right so the map terrified and
enraged conservatives resource extractive industries
and respectable environmentalists alike but by the end of the 1990s the areas of
federal lands off limits to roads and resource
extraction looked a lot more like the earth first map
than anyone else's map from the 80s and so note that this is also how the
right has steadily been accruing power for quite a while now
not by appealing to common values not by meeting people where they're at
but by taking positions that are shocking and unrelentingly maintaining them
through all the enraged discourse until they start to seem normal
or viable or whatever right if people are outraged by your policies
you're doing something right every time they reference you in horror
they give you a bigger platform every time they describe you as a threat
to their way of life or christianity or america
or the cautious deliberative nature of the democratic party or fucking whatever
they make you a more serious and relevant aspect of the political landscape
yeah just think by the year 2000 there will be one big chemical wasteland
yeah i'll contaminate it and creed you with gross bubbles and vines hanging off
the dead trees
number five make an inventory of basic human needs and appeal to people's
desire for stability and security people are witnessing the collapse of their
civilization and are justifiably scared that food
will soon not be on grocery store shelves that marauding bands will soon roam
the streets and all the rest this can make an otherwise
compelling climate strategy seem unviable
again i think this is because of how climate policy has been framed by
liberal environmental groups and policy makers
as something to worry about when we have our basic needs met
which will allow us to keep living essentially the same lives
minus all the destruction in reality the venn diagram of measures to stay
within climate limits and measures to adapt to climate breakdown
is one of two mostly overlapping circles
it was never true that stepping off this catastrophic ecological trajectory
would happen with consumerism intact what is needed in order to avoid
ecological collapse and in the case of ecological collapse
is a local system that meets basic needs a way to produce
enough food to feed people near to where those people live
a way to distribute that food to them enough local renewable energy to
maintain some of the truly essential functions electricity
enables some medical clinics et cetera
fortuitously this is the same infrastructure that is needed to survive
some of the other myriad crises with which the ecological crisis is
converging it's it's what you also want when
the right wing death squads are bombing electrical substations to punish
the left to support land or when amazon is the last
remaining distributor of food in the market economy and they start charging
two hundred dollars for a loaf of bread the desire for radical social
transformation often has conflict as it's only like
really publicly visible manifestation um and the notable exception there are
mutual aid projects which are hugely important both for
meeting people's immediate needs and for shifting perceptions of possible
social relations and this general premise can be applied to
establishing the infrastructure to anticipate crisis as well as to
respond to it this kind of work complements the
work of inventorying the infrastructure of emissions and
making an explicit plan to shut it down it's the work of
establishing what out of the myriad useless or at least far from
essential activities that fossil fuels support
is actually necessary for survival and well-being
simultaneously it's a subversion of the monetary exchanges on which our
current way of life is based so a simple version of a project like this
would be to draw whatever arbitrary lines one wishes on a map and call it a
neighborhood right the the criterion of all points being
inconvenient walking distance might be a good one to apply
and then an inventory of basic needs can be made based on the population
one could look at existing food production that is close by and try to
imagine what agreements and logistics we need to exist to keep enough food
coming into the neighborhood to feed everyone and you know in the case of
Portland I mean you know Oregon does produce a
lot more calories than it consumes and and a lot of that food
production is like really reasonably close to Portland and there's a bunch
of agricultural potential that that isn't being utilized
within and kind of like right around the city so
you know like like that inventory might if you if you took I don't know the
neighborhood I stay in when I'm when I'm in Portland the Hawthorne
neighborhood you know if you like took that neighborhood like I said drew some
arbitrary lines on a map and then you tried to figure
out like how far one would have to go and to whom
to to feed that neighborhood I'm not I think that
the results really might not be that bleak they might actually be pretty
decent so anyway a similar exercise could be
taken for local renewable energy thinking not in terms of what would
replace all the energy currently consumed in a neighborhood
a goal that is neither realistic nor remotely desirable
but in terms of what configurations of infrastructure like solar gardens or
even just rooftop energy production could sustain say
you know the internet some medical devices keeping some of the lights on
some of the time that sort of thing all the trends are converging on a
general ecological collapse in the 2020s
including the collapse of the food system when food production is constrained
to significantly lower levels the power structure
will simply adjust supply lines to the best of its ability
and this ability will be surprisingly minimal as we've
all seen in the covid crisis especially its early phases
um and the power structure will begin raising
costs dramatically intensifying existing dynamics
such that even relatively affluent people will go hungry
so circumventing the market and having our own infrastructure of
distribution will be essential for survival
again the same measures are necessary to both
prevent and endure the apocalypse projects like this are also cases where
abandoning the pension for specialized language
that is so endemic to so many political circles
could be really beneficial um in preparation for an action camp a friend
of mine once made a facebook event with the title
freaking out about climate change and preparing to do something about it
and this event generated more interest more quickly
than the vast vast majority of social media outreach efforts i've been a part of
and i think that this was largely because of the concrete intuitively
comprehensible language if one is organizing to make a
neighborhood more self-reliant i think flyers that say
let's plan how we'll feed ourselves when the grocery store shelves are bare
is a lot more effective than flyers that say
you know like planning for local resilience making
infrastructural cultural and organizational connections or whatever
yeah i'll contaminate and creep with gross bubbles vines hanging off the
dead trees all the mutes be roaming around bumping
into each other
number six fight the culture war you can win
what we can ultimately appeal to is people's desire for freedom
there were numerous cases of early colonists abandoning european civilization
to live with native people there are no documented cases of the
reverse happening our evolved psychological needs for interpersonal
connection competence and authenticity
our needs which consumer civilization militates against
the radical transformations that are necessary to shift the ecological
trajectory are also the only realistic paths away from
varieties of misery that are fundamental and ubiquitous to
living in the society this fact makes the liberal
obsession with claiming that we can live essentially the same lives but
somehow live them within climate limits all the more baffling
such claims acknowledge neither physical nor social reality
the kinds of superficial changes proposed by adherence of the existing
social order imagine if your job racing against a robot in
the amazon fulfillment center produced net zero emissions by 2050
promises more suffering to people who have already exceeded their capacity for
suffering but if we go a little deeper if we
pursue changes that actually have any geophysical salience
we're suddenly talking about living in ways that meet our basic psychological
needs we're talking about things like not going to
work there are significant trade-offs involved with
stepping off the treadmill of consumerism consumer pleasures are
after all pleasant but the part where you get to step off the treadmill is
nice too the trap this economy has laid for us
involves the same biological processes involved in addiction to
substances you do something miserable with most of your day
and then you come home and partake in various gratuitous pleasures to cope
with the misery the trajectory away from extinction
is one where we get to feel better about what we actually do with ourselves
we get more agency we get to feel like what we do might actually matter
but we also may not have as many artisan ice cream shops
all over the place i'm using a somewhat portland specific illustration
here but you know this can be easily generalized
so this is a winnable war a relatively small proportion of the population is
ever going to be moved by ecological messaging
per se i say this is someone who devoted his life
to ecological interventions after a teenage revelation in the forest so
i'm emphatically in that small proportion but that fact makes me all
the more confident in the assessment that most people
simply aren't wired that way and at this point
the empirical reality of how far into collapse we are
with this little meaningful engagement is ample evidence that ecological
messaging has its limits as does all the green jobs
messaging that liberal environmental groups use
fuck your job has a fundamental appeal that we will guarantee that there
will always be some job for you only will be good for the planet
utterly lacks in the city of Portland
we could get somewhere by promoting a political program that will allow us to
go back to spending most of our fucking time making art
and will save the world in other words part of the cultural and
psychological appeal of a political program to avoid extinction
is in avoiding the misery of work in this economy
but part of the appeal is in pursuing the joy of work outside of this economy
if we take work in a broad sense to refer to whatever specialized tasks
people feel it's their mandate to perform
one of the great tragedies of the consumer economy is all the geniuses
who never get to write their mathematical proofs or synthesize
proteins that produce electricity or whatever
because they're too busy chopping garnishes for the lunches of computer
programmers who are also geniuses who never get to put their technical
acumen to any greater purpose than selling advertising
what we're selling is a chance for people to do their most vital
interesting and important work this doesn't just relate to highly
specialized tasks whenever i've not made ends meet with
writing and organizing which has been a considerable majority of the time
i've fallen back online cooking and construction labor
at this point it's somewhere between difficult and impossible to imagine
working any more jobs in these areas but i can't overstate how much i actually
miss both these activities and wish i could apply my skills to something
broadly socially useful outside of a job context
if it was my role to feed my neighborhood in a non-commercial
setting i would cheerfully wake up at 4am to start cracking eggs and
chopping potatoes as i've often done at resistance
kitchens and in collective houses i love to cook for people i take
pride in my ability to create meals out of sparse ingredients
i just can't walk through the doors of another fucking cooking job
by appealing to people's desire to do meaningful work
and avoid meaningless work and apply their specialized skills
and talents we fight a cultural war that has been raging for centuries that
people have always fought intuitively as the rich have sought to ensnare us in
their economy all the mutes be roaming around bumping
into each other yeah my dad was in vietnam and
he had some of that agent orange crab dumped on him
had some adverse effects like what uh his fingernails fell out
and number seven don't wait until you have the perfect coalition
nor the perfect political opportunity the inability of establishment liberals
whether in environmental nonprofits or in public office
to articulate a set of social and economic changes compatible with
ecological limits is not surprising because such changes would be radical
and liberals are inexorably wedded to the saddest quote
however it is undeniably true that grassroots political actors
have likewise failed in this regard in both cases the explicit justification
is that they are waiting for some set of supposedly necessary conditions to be
met within institutional politics uh whether
we're talking about international climate negotiations
or municipal policy everyone is always waiting for sufficient
initiative to exist in other polities before the difficulty
and risk of enacting real climate policies can be undertaken
at the grassroots level the perfect coalition must exist
supposedly representing a massive proportion of the population
and they must agree on every aspect of the policies one pursues
most of the grassroots political actors who have offered an opinion on policies
that i've promoted in the course of my organizing
have told me they didn't have sufficient support from some particular
demographic or another and thus it was not only ill advised but
ultimately oppressive to promote them all of these notions these
variations on waiting until the right conditions are met to begin
proposing concrete changes are based on
a fundamental misunderstanding of the nature of power on the one hand
and a fundamental misunderstanding of the role of imagination
in political change on the other and like the
the nature of parallelism the need the need for pluralism
uh it would be necessary to consult with as many different groups of people
as possible if one had any real shot in
at enacting meaningful policies through institutional channels so like
the Bernie Sanders version of the Green New Deal which is
such such an incredibly broad umbrella term for
such a totally heterogeneous set of policies but the
Bernie Sanders version of it is the only
the only policy like set of policies that i've ever seen really that
that were like in any way commensurate with the nature of the climate
crisis and actually like pretty concretely
addressed addressed most emission sectors in a pretty aggressive way
and you know like Bernie Sanders as much as
as much as a lot of us saw what ended up happening
coming a long way off you know like it was like a
meaningful shot at at taking that office and so like i would say that
in that case i assume that he consulted with all kinds of people and you know
how all kinds of committees representing you know like like
assessing the equity implications like you know like
all that stuff and then that's that's like necessary and right but
if you're doing grass roots like political work
and you know there's not like an imminent
you're not imminently going to seize like federal office or anything
like that in those cases it's just i just
really don't think that waiting until you have the perfect coalition
is coherent so i would say that because no one
does have a real shot at enacting like a truly meaningful set of policies
through institutional channels right now articulating policies
must be thought of as an exercise in changing the political conditions in
which policies are made rather than an exercise in actual
policy making and that's the sense in which i just think
it gives one broad creative license so moreover the notion that a broad
consensus on climate policy is going to emerge from a vacuum
from the abstract question what should we do about climate
being presented to you know refinery workers and people of color who live in
the pollution streams those refinery workers produce
this notion is absurd the only conceivable way for a broad consensus to
emerge is for many different people to explicitly articulate their
different visions and for points of convergence and
divergence to be sought out and assessed among them
what happens when we stop waiting to have the perfect coalition
reach the perfect consensus is that we start having a rich
landscape to draw options from rather than no landscape like we
essentially have right now everyone should have their own climate
policies you should have yours and i should have mine
it's not the work of those in power it's not the work of a coalition
which has yet to really come into existence it's your problem
and mine this is the essential creative courageous work before us
it's fingernails should go out, lots of sexual
avatars, and this
okay we are going to call that an episode i suppose
and you know like five days from now perhaps
i'll have an episode about negative emissions about
greenhouse gas removal protocols and why i think it is time for radical
movements grassroots movements to start having like
to becoming more to start becoming more familiar
with the wide range of different protocols that
exist or at least exist on paper and to start really having some opinions
about some of those and to start maybe advocating for some of us
so until that time thank you so much for listening and we will talk again soon
i've had just seen buddy your two thousand over one big chemical waste
lamp
i've had just seen buddy your two thousand
chemical waste lamp