Title: Believing You Re Trapped in a Simulation Is the New Punk Rock Preview
Episode #: 29
Episode ID: 8374084
Source: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/8374084-believing-you-re-trapped-in-a-simulation-is-the-new-punk-rock-preview.mp3
------------------------------------------------------------

=== EPISODE METADATA ===
Generated: 2026-01-12 01:02:07
Episode ID: 5743684
MP3 File: 5743684-what-elephants-can-teach-us-about-civil-war.mp3
Title: Untitled Episode
Podcast/Artist: Against the Internet
Album/Series: Fight Like An Animal: Biology and Politics
Source URL: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/5743684-what-elephants-can-teach-us-about-civil-war.mp3
========================
In the late 20th century, hostile forces inside the United States grow strong.
The city of Los Angeles is ravaged by crime and immorality.
To protect and defend its citizens, the United States police force is formed.
Some of the recent protests against police violence and racism have been met with a federal response.
Los Angeles Island is declared no longer part of the United States
and becomes the deportation point for all people found undesirable or unfit to live in the new moral America.
More federal law enforcement than I can tell you in Portland.
They've done a fantastic job. These are anarchists. These are not protesters.
People say protestants. These people are anarchists. These are people that hate our country.
An earthquake measuring 9.6 on the Richter scale hits at 12.59 p.m. August 23rd in the year 2000.
Okay, greetings friends. I'm Arnold Schroeder and this is Fight Like An Animal.
And as always, you can find the bibliography for this episode of the podcast at AgainstToTheInternet.com.
And if I am not mistaken, which I somewhat frequently am with respect to the rate of my own output,
but if I am not mistaken, I think we're at the outset of something of like an episode frenzy here,
Fight Like An Animal. Today we are going to talk about behavioral biology and other species,
namely elephants and their thresholds for aggression and the changes in behavior that they've experienced as a result of chronic threat.
And then we are going to try to map that out.
We are going to discuss the homologies between our behavior and theirs,
and indeed between our behavior and that of other vertebrates and animals in general.
There's always a mapping in this podcast between behavior and other species in our own.
In this case, we really will discuss. I think that sometimes people misunderstand and think that it's all just kind of analogy.
So in this episode, we'll get kind of rigorous with discussing some of the exact same brain regions
that are involved in the same behaviors and things like that.
And then I am very eager. I think that ultimately what's up is that there's just such a rapid pace to reality right now.
And so I just feel this pretty desperate inclination to address all these different topics.
And so I'm really eager to do an episode on negative emissions.
Any time that you see a government or a corporation or who the fuck ever pledged some like,
we're going to reach net zero emissions by 2050, which is a straight up form of climate denial, by the way.
That's totally insufficient. But anytime you see that, even those insufficient targets, the net is there because they're not actually trying to get to zero emissions.
They're planning on there still being some greenhouse gas emissions happening while greenhouse gases are being removed from the atmosphere via protocols,
which have not yet been implemented anywhere. Right. And so I did a big literature review about this.
I personally think that we are well past climate tipping points already.
And that there is no that survival for us or for the vast, vast majority, perhaps all species depends on on removing greenhouse gases from the atmosphere.
And so I did a big literature review about this. And it's actually a fascinating landscape with a bunch of stuff that does actually seem to have like some really legitimate potential,
which naturally hasn't really been explored and isn't like a favored isn't like a favored approach of the of the like entities that are in charge of of climate discussions at the international level
or of like governments or really anybody with any remote claim to power. And then, you know, of course, the ideas that are horrible or just like profoundly speculative
or don't really, you know, or like imply some terrible danger are naturally the the approaches that the fucking like the IPCC and all these other entities are really like keep promoting.
So we're going to do that. And then I have I'm working on a couple episodes with a friend at the same time.
So we'll even have some moments of fight like an animal that that aren't just me gravely intoning the things that I've read in scientific papers all by myself.
It'll be fun.
Okay, so let's start today by talking about the respective artistic output of authoritarians as opposed to anti authoritarians.
And namely that if you're like, well, what's what's some good authoritarian art, you know, like, especially if it's not abstract, like, especially if you're not talking about people who are like, I believe in a spiritual hierarchy,
you know, like, if you're talking about people who are like, like, Donald fucking Trump, think the guy's great, right?
Like, like, what kind of art did these people make it? And, and, you know, the obvious answer is that you're really going to you're going to spend a lot of time looking and you're not going to find much, you know, like what's what are some what are some
banging tracks that some authoritarians put out recently. I can think I can think of some some folks who tried there was there was the recent foray of like Southern Florida white Trump dudes into like trap music.
I don't know if y'all caught that I'm talking about talking about best believe and for Gyato blows proud American y'all heard this.
So I mean, I don't know who knows what to say about something like this. I feel a bit obligated to say something clever about it.
But it's also just such low hanging fruit. I don't know. Like, yeah, it's it's pretty thematically inconsistent to say, as far as like on point, Republican messaging goes for a candidate who's running on a law order and law and order platform.
I don't really think saying that you got some free money from from the guy and you used it to cop a P which you then flipped is like really like really in the same in the same like framework that the Trump campaign is presenting whatever I don't know.
I don't know. I don't know what to say. The point is actually that it is like it's it's like kind of almost not interesting to make fun of some Republican fucking rap from Florida because I can just describe that as a genre and everybody's going to know that it's
terrible right and that is the that's the actual point is just that there's there's not like a very rich landscape of artistic expression associated with authoritarianism.
I guess like the genre of music that the right has has kind of monopolize I mean even though it actually has super radical and very like diverse roots. I guess you know it's like country music or that's that shouldn't even really country music though right
it's like pop country music which is quasi universally acknowledged by almost everybody who's not culturally and ideologically committed to the genre as some of the most terrible music that's being made anywhere by anybody.
And whatever there's a lot of it in everything but it also it has this really particular quality that one would kind of not really associate with art in general and wouldn't say like characterizes artists which is this sort of like this militant proud ignorance like
like so much of the music is about is about being really content with whatever very simple set of variables one is familiar with from birth and how one is like proud of not having any interest in seeing what the world is like or like examining any other perspective
or leaving your fucking hometown or whatever. So there's a current in this that I think is very common in contemporary country music which is a runaway anti intellectualism which is a very very prominent feature in contemporary country music
which is again not only do you not know something or not care to learn something or not educated but this is a proxy for virtue. And yeah there's no real reason to restrict this statement to like music you know it's true of all genres right
like I can't think of I can't think of some like great visual artist who is like a crazed right winger. Also like this effect is more pronounced now kind of than it ever has been before because I can think you know if I think back through like the 20th century
his repound was a fucking amazing poet and he was also a crazy fascist. So I'm not saying it never happens but but it's it's noteworthy when you like when you think about that like even even then like even even like the 20th century and the kind of like weird fluid
relationship between some art scenes and fascism ultimately statistically speaking it's actually like huge outliers it's a it's a minority of people who are like both make good art and are like consciously supporting fascism at its fully like
politically developed stage where you really under you know where one could really understand the implications of that you know so I don't know like this true who are the great who are the great right wing like like producers of literature
I guess I guess Ben Shapiro. Yeah so the crack cement tore into the souls of Brett's feet gashing them but Brett hardly felt it he hadn't moved this fast since high school football get the fuck out of here he screamed at the
American standing 20 yards above him on the stairs they know you're here get out he heard the sound of a couple of safeties being switched off and then he saw the guns pointed directly at him run you morons he shouted the operatives were blocking the
stairs standing there idiotically. Yeah multiple podcasts have been putting out episodes devoted to the reading of Ben Shapiro's terrible novel because it's bad enough that it really is that funny.
So you know there's that pretty easy to make point generally speaking authoritarians not great artists and then the the countervailing point is actually like hard to like
make in any rigorous sense just because anti authoritarianism is so ubiquitous among among people who make art that it's kind of like an impossible landscape to survey out and where do you start where do you stop
what do you really say but but I want to point out I wanted to point out this one particular artistic moment that I thought was so poignant and illustrated so much about what it might be like if
if you're anything like me you're you're spending a lot of time thinking about what it might be like if the facade of democracy that has existed in this nation which as much as it is a facade has
actually been very useful and meaningful in a lot of ways because the facade really does restrain the behavior of the powerful but you know so if you're like me you've been wondering what it's going to be like when that facade crumbles
and if you're anything like me and a whole lot of other people you've been thinking that that might happen around let's say November 3rd we might find out you know so like I thought that I thought that this illustrated
what if we get to a point I think historians might if there's historians to to retrospect on this moment at a sufficient at a sufficiently removed time in the future then you know I mean I think they might say we're already in a civil war but if we get to the point where it's like
chronic violence mass mortality you know gunfire in the streets all the time sort of civil war and so this this this moment was this I don't know like I guess performance art piece called the Portland statue initiative and
these people I thought I really thought at first I saw photographs and I really thought that it was a statue but it was actually like a performance piece people spray painted themselves gold and then they kind of enacted this the statue configuration with federal troops dragging a
gesture into an unmarked van it was right when that was like happening in Portland and getting a lot of attention and it kind of replicated this iconic photograph of that happening this really terrifying chilling photograph and then and then
is playing golf in the foreground right and this is right when this is right when statues were coming down all the fuck over the place too so it had like I mean I don't know like you know you could like it or you could not like it but it was definitely like it was definitely
like a conceptually integrated like piece of art with like a bunch of pretty sophisticated different like layers of reference and interrelated meanings and you know I mean it was definitely some like art right and and I thought it was so I thought it was so striking
because on the one hand as far as like contesting against the Trump regime or whatever in the realm of like artistic production and commentary you know I mean there's just there's just no way there's just no way that he or his sick offense could at all replicate this
could at all match this level of like cleverness and and artistic aptitude but then at the same time the what the physical situation that they're referencing is an is an act of violence right and so so the the question the question that the art piece kind of implies to me is
like who is going to win the people who make the better art or the people with the bigger arsenals and so if you listen to episodes one through three and you're familiar with my hypothesis that I present there and you know what I'm going to say next
which is that this this is what this is a state of affairs we would predict from the hypothesis right that and to briefly reiterate if you if you didn't listen to those episodes the hypothesis is that aggression and its correlated
traits and aggression is correlated with like a rich idiosyncratic complex of traits that variation in aggression and those correlated traits maps to variation in political outlook and that people with more hierarchical outlooks
tend to have more of an aggressive disposition and then diminished aggression which I believe is associated with more egalitarian outlooks is also I mean diminished aggression comes about as the result of a developmental process human evolution
itself comes about as a result of the prolongation of developmental processes associated with brain maturation and development and diminishment of aggression a condition to which all humans are subject in in our evolutionary history but there's a range of variation
and those who are who are more subject to a prolongation of developmental processes that that are associated with diminished aggression develop like enhanced capacities for social cognition and greater cognitive complexity and so it's exactly what you'd expect you'd expect
people with more egalitarian perspectives to be better writers better at just sort of like in generally like any given mode of like cultural production they you know you would expect them to be better artists you'd expect more of them to be scientists
all anything of that nature and so we can see what that differential in in aggression and and like capacity for cultural production looks like you know when people are fighting in the streets and the just like the very different approaches that people take to conflict the
ideologically correlated differences in like what conflict even means to different people you know to some people it means an AR-15 and a flak jacket and to other people it just doesn't mean that it means it's like it's it's pretty dark you know it's like people are contending in two totally separate domains
like one in a symbolic conceptual realm and one in a physical realm involving violence and you can also see this in terms of the the profound ideological correlations with just where people kind of self selects into in society what roles they take what occupations they inhabit
there's a lot of really interesting ideological correlations with occupation I'll put a link I'll put a link in the bibliography to that I want to mention real quickly are of course that you know policing is a fundamentally right wing phenomenon a fundamentally authoritarian phenomenon
and people who are angry at the police tend to point that out pretty often and then one that that right wingers point out pretty often that is also true is that academia is is very left and liberal
as you can kind of see how that like plays out I guess to take to take an example take the example of race race relations in the United States of America right in terms of how we talk about race in terms of like the the terminology we use to designate different racial categories in terms of like there you can't say that there hasn't been like a cultural shift like it's like literally like
just in terms of like the nature of the dialogue around race or like what's kind of acceptable to say or not say in your lifetime or you know in the last like four or five decades however you want to think about it.
But but then if you if you look at physical reality.
Things have either stayed the same or gotten worse in terms of racial disparities in incarceration in experiencing police violence in economic you know economic disparities all that stuff is all that stuff is not changing.
Right so you can see you can see that reality of like these these ideologically correlated sort of like roles that people have in society where they're having their respective effects where the people who are really good at cultural production who are who have more egalitarian outlooks are in fact.
You know going out there and changing some things in the realms that they work in and the cops and the people who control the economy and all that they're out there doing their thing or you could take you could take the global ecological trajectory right the the thing that I've spent most of my productive energies in this life or the majority of my productive energies in this life.
Trying to address and like all other environmentalists I have done this by by writing things by organizing blockades I mean I'm not saying everybody's done all these things but you know by by making impassioned please by by learning the law and filing administrative appeals of timber sales and things like that doing administrative law.
And you know it's it's totally true that that all the people who are doing that have kind of changed some aspect of like the cultural conception of the of the global ecological trajectory there's like you know that the way that it's talked about is in fact different.
There's pretty much no corporation that doesn't claim at least to some degree to be like fervently fervently working to to stave off crisis you know like chevron exists as a function of reverence for the living world like whatever right you know but then but then while me and people like me have been doing that some other mother fuckers who have like bulldozers and big cement mixers.
And a bunch of dynamite they've been doing their thing right and so we once again see these predictable effects this like massive disjunction between like what's being changed in terms of like cultural symbolic linguistic reality and what's happening in the corporeal world.
And so if you're anything like me when you think about that that differential in in these two modes of contestation the like corporeal the physically violent versus like the the realm of cultural production and you think about the prospect of like a coming civil war it it
it bums you out like I you know and I don't know it's really interesting to see I guess like to be honest about my experience of speculating about this which I'm constantly constantly doing is like I'm very capable of cycling through a lot of really different perspectives and acknowledging a lot of really different possibilities.
Kind of all in the same you know like moment and I don't necessarily think that's a bad thing I really don't think we know the future and I mean if 2020 told us anything it's to like really keep that in mind.
And it's just like it's just like an incredible time it's a breathtaking time because it simultaneously is a time of such catastrophe and tragedy and a time of such great possibility and you know if you're somebody who is addicted to politics for a long time you've always known that that's that's true there's
the famous I fucking wish it was somebody other than Thomas Friedman who said it but you know the whole thing about crisis and opportunity being essentially equivalent.
But yeah like when when people talk about when people talk about this like coming civil war I feel like pretty often there's a there's a sort of like implicit assumption there that that there are in fact two sides that have like an equal capacity for violence and that's just really not at all clear to me.
When one like work that just keeps getting cited I swear I see a new piece that sites this work every single day on the Internet was that transition integrity project thing that happened a while ago which was like some Democrats and some Republicans got together and talked about what happens when
Trump doesn't leave office and you know so there's like it's really like it was really one of those it was really one of those like exercises or sensibly this is a simulation there they're like modeling what happens when Trump doesn't leave office and I just don't I mean it's like they
literally like it's a role playing game people take people take some different roles they roll some dice at various junctures and bizarrely the rolling of dice I feel like is supposed to give the project this quality of like rigor that it would supposedly otherwise lack like oh no this is a real simulation
like there's probabilities involved this is a statistical model but ultimately like what are they telling us other than we sat down and we speculated about what might happen and maybe our speculation is better than some other people speculation and maybe it ain't you know but like the yeah so that's like there's
there's endless pieces citing the transition integrity project or that once again like just the role really all seem to like I've seen I've seen people making parallels between what's happening and like the Russian Revolution and like the Afghan insurgency and all these things where I'm like yeah but where is I can see the one side with all their assault rifles and everything and I like I'm eminently familiar with the landscape of like leftist gun clubs
and you know like anarcho vets training people in the forest and all that shit like I know that stuff exists but I should just like I really don't think it's proportional at all you know or like I was saying like I just I cycle through all these different perspectives
where sometimes I think that like we really could have the sustained like civil war kind of situation where it actually is a meaningful conflict between two sides and other times it just feels to me like the right wing militias are essentially developing into a pretty conspicuous analog of like the death squads that you know it's a lot of the worst moments in history involve a right
wing government and then or really whatever kind of government an authoritarian government and then like a kind of like a mobilized grassroots sort of like paramilitary force that actually commits a lot of the atrocities and a lot of the time.
It seems like the American trajectory is just sort of headed there and you know and that is like that is because of this like differential capacity for aggression and the very very in those situations there's always like an exceptionally fluid relationship between formally
constituted security forces government government like military and cop entities and then like these paramilitary forces and and that's that's very conspicuously what's happening in the United States to quote a piece from the Atlantic about the
with keepers who are definitely as far as right wing militias go like like really on the milk toast end of the spectrum right really on the like really on the like yeah we don't wear skull masks and talk about blowing up power stations to initiate a race for
of end of the right wing militia continuum but I they're very clearly still like the the proto material for like that type of phenomenon to emerge for a death squad dynamic to to come about in the United States so to quote from this piece in the
Atlantic monitoring groups couldn't say for sure how many members the oath keepers had or what kind of people were joining but the leaked database laid everything out it had been compiled by Rhodes's deputies as new members signed up at recruiting events or on the
keepers website they hailed from every state about two thirds had a background in the military or law enforcement about 10% of these members were active duty there was a sheriff in Colorado a SWAT team member in Indiana a police patrolman in Miami the chief of a
small police department in Illinois there were members of the special forces private military contractors an army Psyop sergeant major a cavalry scout instructor in Texas a grunt in Afghanistan there were immigration
and customs enforcement officers a 20 year special agent in the secret service and two people who said they were in the FBI right and there is nothing like that anywhere else in the political landscape like we don't have that whoever we are you know obviously I don't know you know
like weary ecological militants who are using behavioral biology to try to understand the converging social and ecological crises don't have that neither do people who want Joe Biden to be president so that it can feel like 2009 again right there is just nowhere
else except the authoritarian elements of the political landscape where there is this level of seamless integration of of like formally constituted government military and police forces and in these like paramilitary entities
and the thing that I want to note is that this is actually this differential in the capacity for aggression has has maybe never been as true at any other point in history as it is now that's an interesting thing where you know like everybody thinks the reason that people don't
want to involve biology and their understandings of human behaviors because they think it implies some like fixity some like inevitability some like rigid and that's just nonsense thinking it's actually interesting because when you take the biological approach to looking at the like egalitarian to hierarchical continuum of political perspectives
you can you actually develop a framework where you can really like see the variation and the variation and how it manifests and so like I think that there's two reasons that I would note for this one which we're not going to really talk about too much this time is just
is just actually like a political a political trajectory a political reason which is that like really really anti hierarchical modes of organizing and communicating have become the just the default standard in resistance movements around the world
something that can very plausibly be described as anarchist organizing principles now animate a huge number of movements everywhere you know like Hong Kong Chile wherever wherever you want to talk about even if and I think this is a good thing
even if the term anarchism absolutely never gets thrown around in those movements and you know and this is a non trivial development on a quote I've mentioned this before but I found this good piece that would that just came out I believe this was published in crime
I'm think called why anarchism is dangerous where they where they mentioned this phenomenon I just I just wanted to to quote from it really quickly over the past century and a half and particularly in the last two decades the self managing principles of anarchism have proliferated around
the world and have also become part of the standard operating procedures of protest today's anarchists are neither leading nor instigating the current protests the anarchist role in the actions however goes far beyond being in the streets with protesters
since anarchism is reemergence in the 1990s when anarchist organizing principles were used to shut down the world trade organization meetings in Seattle anarchism has permeated contemporary oppositional movements the anarchist emphasis on direct action and street militants help define today's movements as do the use of affinity groups and black block tactics militant
horizontalism is today's protest standards I think that's very well put and I emphatically agree and so that the reason that this does imply some differential in the capacity for violence is that there there is like I mean you can look
historically whether you're talking about the Roman conquest of Gaul or Comanche's fighting the Texas Rangers or anarchist fighting the fascists in the Spanish Civil War it's it's dark it's just like it's just like one of those dark features of the reality we inhabit which is that
hierarchies may be like bad they might not really work for people very well but they're very successful right that when people are engaged in a violent conflict what we do actually see over and over again often there's a phase where the people who are who are fighting in a less hierarchical fashion or like a more like wild fashion in the case of two of those examples I just gave
they actually have some really interesting significant advantages at first but that sooner or later military forces that are very like hierarchical end up like it actually does become like a really significant advantage at a certain point for there to be somebody who can simply
say to people like go over that hill and die right you know like where where they can like kind of force decisions on people that people won't make if they're just kind of if people if like the behavior of an armed faction is sort of like an emergent property of all these people
making individual choices that make sense you know it's and so so that's like part of it part part of the reason that there's differential capacity for aggression is that movements that actually take to the streets you know like 3040 years ago often had like a great leader and like a pretty well defined hierarchy
and now they don't and so that that to some extent probably does diminish our capacity for for engaging in in physical contests in of force but then what we'll actually talk about much more today is the like developmental context and so if you go to some of those same
because like I guess you can you can look at a history of really radically egalitarian political movements and see how there was a lot more like of an emphasis on violence itself and also just kind of like a toughness you know like a
like a lot more like tough guy shit for better or for worse or really I don't think it's either I think there's just like a huge number of trade-offs involved there those movements you know once again tended to replicate the hierarchies that they opposed more frequently but
but they also were maybe a little less prone to just being slaughtered in the streets but so the developmental context like again to throw some well yeah to like to name those conflicts that I just described like you know if you read Caesar's
Gallic Wars he talks about how the further you get from the comforts of Roman civilization the the tougher and crazier the people get right and you know Tacitus said the same thing
about writing about writing in Germania about the Germanic tribes you know where he he was kind of like one of the first people to to be like an author who romanticizes like an archaic an archaic way of seeing the world and being
you know kind of like skeptical of some of the effects of civilization on people he talks about how the people in the Germanic tribes are just like more resilient and crazy and tough and you know like they're harder motherfuckers right
and you know certainly when when when the United States and other European colonizing forces encounter Native Americans many similar commentaries were made and this has been a this has been like a steady process that has been going on it's not I'm
not just trying to point out a transition between like you know like civilization and not civilization or anything like that I'm all of those binaries are suspect to me anyway the you know like the the last say century of the human
experience has involved all of these all of these comforts which come at a cost even at the level of our like baseline just physiological processes the fact that our physiological needs are met on such predictable schedules and in particular
with like such relatively little effort has pretty significant consequences to quote from a paper on physiological regulation and the effect that our civilization has had on it in earlier times the essentials food water warmth and rest were matters of uncertainty
then each instance of satisfying each of these qualitative needs provided a positive reward prediction error and thus a pulse of dopamine now as modern life provides most of our material needs with relatively little effort or surprise these qualitative sources of positive reward prediction
error shrink since the great edifice of brain centered regulation depends on dopamine pulses we feel quite uncomfortable without them and are driven to seek new sources one way to imbue an expected event with surprise is to intensify it
an expected food can be made sweeter and or greasier and the portion can be made larger more drugs are introduced such as nicotine alcohol cocaine amphetamines or opioids that powerfully increased dopamine on demand thus we suggest that the soaring levels of various addictions reflect desperate efforts to manage life in the absence of small qualitative pleasures and
I mean I have mixed feelings about that very last statement I think that it's absolutely true particularly if we extend the definition of addiction to encompass like a bunch of processes that we just sort of associate with the civilization we live in
actual addiction to like drugs like meth and opioids I mean I consider myself something of like a connoisseur of addictions and statistically speaking those those particular addictions are also heavily predicted by like experiences of abuse and like tremendous
to be in like some kind of really intense pain of some variety usually for those things to be appealing but the basic process of it of being addicted to those substances is like at a neurological level homologists with all the other fucking addictions that characterize our civilization you know all the like cell phone
social media television just all all of the pleasures that people are addicted to and you know there is like a there's a sort of like a very general phenomenon where if you have addiction whether we're talking about TV or cocaine where if you get a big if you get a big
dose of pleasure for nothing you just you end up on this trajectory where you're seeking out increasingly huge rewards for increasingly little work and you usually end up very miserable very fast and it's this kind of like very distinct misery where you're
not you're not like engaging your capacities I guess you could say living up to your potential or whatever and our our evolutionary experience was very different where we we did some really intense work to to meet like baseline baseline needs
but that the the landscape of like dopamine rewards and dopamine seeking like reward seeking in our brain was was really different and you know kind of ultimately like probably people were a lot happier in certain respects as with everything
there's always gonna be just trade-offs but but it definitely makes people to use it you know just to like not we could we can be all theoretical about this and say like stress mediated resilience or whatever but it makes people tougher it makes people tougher to have to seek out rewards
and do hard things to get them rather than to just have the like a glut of them always at their disposal so you know this is like this is one of the many respects in which talking about by like because biology is real because because
biology actually describes the human experience and human behavior when you invoke it you end up saying a lot of shit that just sounds a whole lot like common sense you know people love to be like dazzled by weird counterintuitive social theories and so
when you're in that landscape when you're in when you're in the landscape of social constructivism you know you get all these you get all these notions that are that are conceptually novel and when you're doing biology it's it's a lot of stuff like this like yeah
turns out turns out difficult and adverse experiences and hardship make people tougher right okay you know turns out if you raise a plant outside and this plant you know seeds from the same plant in like a greenhouse the plant that grew in the greenhouse
is all soft and supple and the plant that had some like variation in temperature and some difficult some difficult mornings when it almost frosted you know that that plant is all like tough and woody right so that's the developmental context in part
and I think that this applies equally well to to everywhere on the political spectrum I mean I think that a lot of people have observed the last at least the last four years of politics in America if not longer with some surprise that
were not already at like an outright shooting war stage of civil you know like it seems like it seems like we almost should be in a civil war and there's like a strange level of restraint for how much like profound animosity there is
but you know but that is because of all the comfort because there's like there's consequences for for engaging in really serious violence and because at the end of the day people you know people want to go back to their houses and watch some more Netflix as
opposed to go to prison or die and so you know so like I feel like you can see that on the right as well as the left like I think that I've been experiencing showdowns with like crazed right wingers on the streets for for a long time and I do I do
have to say like the current phase of it does as much as these these folks are like terrifying and you know and I'm perfectly capable of looking at them and being like oh yeah, maybe we're all going to die because of these people.
There is also something about them that even in my lifetime I would say they've gotten like a lot more like they have they have a much more distinctly like shlubby I just got off the internet, you know, quality than they used to.
But then like I've also talked about I mean I think that there's a there's a way in which it's affected everybody this developmental context but there's also a way in which it's differentially affected people with different kinds of perceptions and basic orientations to the world
because that's just like the process we're in generally like we're we're all hyper specializing as our civilization is getting more complex which means that we're all getting more you know like into increasingly increasingly specialized which means increasingly limited it
you know it implies both like a greater depth of very specific knowledge but also a lack of more general knowledge. And so like people who are less prone to aggression, I think have just tended to more so than you would see in a conflict between egalitarians and
authoritarians 100 years ago. People with more egalitarian perspectives have just really hyper specialized in in like language and cultural production and symbolic systems of meaning and all that at the expense of invoking those like behavioral perceptual
programs that that are good for good for killing people in the streets. So I want to talk about this developmental context with respect to elephants.
And in some respects, it's a little bit of the reverse process. And what I hope that we could maybe model from this is what it would be like to experience significant like sufficient trauma and a substantial enough sense of threat that that the
thresholds for aggression that seem to have been so conspicuously raised among people in modern technologically intensive hyper complex societies with egalitarian political outlooks.
You know, like, like, how essentially how we can potentially cross those thresholds of aggression. So elephants, I guess it could be said have tried non violence and it failed. Right. They really have the thing that the non violence people want us to do that, you know,
like the elephants have suffered very nobly and have with without retaliation just kind of responded to their systematic extermination with displays of, you know, like how beautiful and wise and sentient and compassionate and gentle they were.
The elephants have played a very deep game of respectability politics while their populations there's I guess four species of elephant. And I am mostly but not exclusively going to be talking about African elephants, which is not the only species of elephant in Africa but kind of like the major one that you
see in a bunch of different habitats. And populations of elephants of all species of elephants in Africa have declined by like more than 95%. Right. So while they have been systematically exterminated for the vast majority of that trajectory, they, they displayed very little aggression towards
towards people or towards each other. And that has really radically changed in recent years. So elephants, you know, elephants are going away both because of habitat destruction, but also because of like direct killing.
And this has a bunch of different effects and to understand them, you have to understand elephants social structure and their develop their developmental context.
To quote from a paper on the subject, elephant social contexts are organized in nested sets of sustained relationships revolving around a natal family composed of a matriarch and female alo mothers.
After weaning females remain in the natal herd learning how to care for younger herd members while young males between the ages of nine and 18 years leave and enter a second phase of socialization in the company of an all bull group or area.
Now this process, the experience of growing up in a society like this, this developmental context is necessary for elephants to actually develop some of the neural connections that will facilitate characteristic elephant behavior in adulthood.
Some of the, some of the synaptogenesis and some of the neuro genesis the creation of neurons and synapses to quote from gay Bradshaw's book elephants on the edge.
Elephant society includes a strong sense of belonging and family identification. This awareness sense of connection placement and relatedness extend beyond the family unit.
One expression of this unity is a strong value of reciprocity and to a certain extent a kind of leveling that marks relationships.
For example, the infant who has been tended by young females will when their alo mothers bear their own babies reciprocate by caring for these new young family members.
Regardless of genetic relatedness, rank or gender, all elephants seem to show concern about ill or dying individuals.
The literature is replete with examples. So female elephants and male elephants until their teenagers live in these in these groups with like a matriarch, right?
And she possesses a bunch of knowledge that nobody else does.
She possesses in a lot of cases knowledge about like ecological knowledge about like where suitable water sources and a particularly dry spell like where to go to eat when when times are tough.
And then she also possesses like a tremendous amount of social knowledge that actually really does have a significant bearing on the the viability of an elephant population.
And so, you know, these these groups that are where matriarchs are dominant are fusion fission societies.
There's they are family groups, but you know, these elephant groups meet up with other elephants pretty frequently and have varying degrees of like contact integration, spend time together, move around together for a while.
And that is, you know, it's a function of familiarity.
And so the the matriarchs are repositories of all this complex social knowledge that helps the elephant group navigate who to hang out with and who to act kind of defensive around.
So the older the matriarch, there's a there's a correlation.
There's a curve that describes how likely elephant an elephant group is to to defensively like cluster, which is what they what they do when they're encountering a group that they don't have a lot of like social history of social contact
like, you know, any familiarity. So they get into this defensive configuration.
And in elephant groups where there isn't really like a, you know, a truly wise old matriarch, where maybe they've lost they've lost the older females, which there's a demographic skew in elephant populations because people are killing them for their tusks.
So they tend to kill the biggest elephants, ie the oldest and wisest elephants.
So there's a, you know, there's a this curve that describes how likely elephants are to engage in this defensive behavior relative to how for like unfamiliar or familiar a group is like when they hear the call whether the matriarch recognizes that that group and it's a function of age.
So the older the matriarch is, the more that an elephant group only gets into a defensive configuration when they're around an elephant group that's actually unfamiliar and actually poses a potential threat.
And, and then groups that are led by younger, less experienced females tend to kind of get into these defensive configurations more or less at random.
And so they waste a bunch of energy, they miss social opportunities, and they fail to actually detect legitimate threats.
And so that's, you know, that's that's life in the, in the female dominated aspect of elephant society.
And it's, it's one of like really, it's one of like really intimate contacts between all all of these different animals.
To quote again, bonding between an infant and his mother occurs early on, and a young elephant may suckle from his mother until about four years of age.
Yet while it is the mother with whom the infant interacts the most, a young elephant has more exchanges cumulatively with other family members.
The elephant life is communal. The elephant care village is made up of aloe mothers, other females, siblings, aunts and cousins, who tend to every aspect of calf upbringing,
though on the rare occasion when a baby tries to suckle from another calf's mother, that female usually rejects the trespasser.
Social exchanges include such physical greetings as touching trunks on different parts of the body and mouth or rubbing against each other.
Touching also provides comfort and assurance when a baby becomes distressed from straying too far afield.
So we can see we're in similar territory to what we talked about a few episodes back with with infant monkeys being deprived of maternal contact.
Once again, these are like developmentally crucial experiences.
If they don't happen in the relevant developmental window, there is a lifelong impact on adult behavior and affect.
So the impacts of people killing elephants can kind of be...
Well, and of their populations declining through other means, I guess, but the actual killing of elephants has two effects.
One is the trauma itself. So elephants witness this, right? And they're not that different than us.
They know what's happening. They distinguish between people who have in the past caused them harm and who have helped them in the past.
Elephants know that people are hunting them, and elephants know that they are dying out.
They know that their existence is threatened.
And so that has a bunch of...
Because once again, it's older elephants that tend to get killed.
It leaves younger elephants having witnessed these horrors and living with the knowledge that someday these horrors may very well be visited upon them.
And so that has the effects of PTSD, very similar syndrome of consequences.
But then it also...
When individuals, particularly older individuals, are taken out of populations, it has these very long-term effects just in terms of shifting the social configuration and therefore the developmental context that elephants emerge out of.
Quoting again, from another paper, disrupted populations typically experience two specific effects that are likely to impact on their social functioning.
Initial trauma that may accompany the disruptive event, which can involve survivors observing the killing of individuals around them,
and the subsequent loss of opportunities for interacting with older group members that could act as appropriate role models or repositories of knowledge.
And then they talk about the PTSD-esque aspects of this.
With regard to the first of these impacts, it is now becoming clear that in animals as well as humans, social trauma experienced early in life may have very significant effects on physiological development and adult behavior patterns.
For instance, in highly socially and cognitively advanced species such as primates and elephants, where neurological development is strongly mediated by exposure to complex social information,
a severely disruptive event can result in the expression of one or more non-normative behaviors during later life, including persistent fear, hyperaggression, and infant abandonment.
And so as a result, and then with respect to this other effect, the changes in the developmental context, we now see elephant societies of a variety that just absolutely never existed until very recently in history.
We see very young mothers, like much younger mothers than existed before, raising calves.
Often alone, there's like single mothers raising calves.
There are significant aggregations of orphans who just don't have any adult interactions, who are just kind of all like roaming around together trying to figure out life.
There is a lot of infant abandonment by mothers who just didn't have the appropriate developmental context or were too traumatized by things they experienced.
And then there's just like these configurations of elephants where maybe a lot of different age groups are represented or whatever, but they're just nothing.
They kind of just utterly lack the structure that tip is characteristic of elephant societies.
They're just kind of these like random semi-permanent aggregations of animals.
Like Uganda has these aggregations of traumatized elephants, like in some cases of over 170 elephants with a lot of females, young females between the ages of 15 and 25.
So elephants live for a really long time.
That's like a young animal who don't have any familial association.
There's no hierarchical structure.
And infants are being reared in these configurations by very inexperienced, highly stressed single mothers who don't have the socioecological knowledge that the matriarchs possess.
And they don't have that support network of all those other like foster moms, the alo mothers.
And so female elephants are going crazy from the experiences of trauma, raising their young in really different ways and just lacking for the structure to raise them in.
And then in terms of the male social configurations that exist in parallel to these matriarch run societies.
So when elephants get to a certain age, they bounce.
While the majority of elephant research has focused on the females, the lure of baby elephants milling around giant wrinkled feet portrayed in so many films.
Joyce Poole made one of the earliest forays into the impressive world of bull elephants.
To discover that they too had an intriguing subculture in language.
Male elephant rearing is divided into two major phases.
From birth until the ages of nine to 15 years, young male elephants live with their female siblings and cousins in the natal family unit.
Early life is rooted in female culture with female ways.
But as they move from childhood to their teens, male calves gradually decrease physical closeness with their mothers or are shoot out.
At puberty, they leave their siblings and cousins and travel with other bachelors in a second phase of socialization interrupted by the occasional visit home.
Young bulls are initiated into the masculine world to learn the basics of elephant etiquette and the complexities of bull life in the great expanse throughout which they roam and must survive.
This phase is associated with a second stage of brain reorganization which has homologies with the developmental processes of a bunch of other animals including humans.
For a lot of us that's kind of intuitively familiar that one can wander at any stage in their life but if one is going to have a wandering stage where they kind of leave the group and go off and just see what it's all about out there in the world,
if they're just going to have one it is most likely to be this kind of period between mid adolescence to kind of your early 20s or something.
So adolescent males go off and wander around in these groups, these all male groups that have a pronounced dominance hierarchy.
So there's older individuals that they have to listen to and learn from essentially and that experience helps regulate the development of their aggressive capacities.
They learn the social context in which aggression is appropriate and the ones in which it isn't, the ones in which it might be a good idea and the ones in which it would be a really, really bad idea.
And let's zoom out for a second and talk about the kind of like vast existential lessons that we can learn from elephants about what's possible for configurations of organisms to achieve.
Just in the sense that like a thought experiment that I consistently find really interesting and rewarding is just to imagine what the world would be like if different species were the first to attain our sort of like levels of cognitive ability and technological ability.
And I think that elephants are one of the species where I could imagine that that would happen and global destruction wouldn't be imminent.
And all of the species that I can think of that are like that have, they don't have the dynamic of male aggression being like the defining feature of the power configurations in a given society,
which isn't to say there's a male-female differential in aggression that is pretty universal in like a whole, whole, whole lot of like the vast majority of species.
And there's some good evolutionary reasons for that. Gender is a trade-off. But the species like bonobos and elephants where male aggression doesn't totally determine the social dynamics are species where there has been kind of like a feminist revolution where that aggression is regulated by females.
And I think that the example of elephants is really interesting with respect to humans because I think that all conceivable configurations of human society that were viable in the long term that weren't just like idiotic killing sprees that lasted for a brief moment when we had all this technology that allowed this level of destruction.
Any conceivable viable human society that I can think of would not be defined by male aggression.
And at the same time, I don't think gender is a social construct, which is not to say that gender is a strict binary or that there isn't an incredible complexity of gender expressions that exist out there, but it is built on something male and female that exists in a whole lot of other species.
And I think that that is one of the things that we have to come to terms with when we try to conceive of hypothetical future societies is the fact that male aggression exists and kind of has to go somewhere.
There has to be some outlet for, even if it's not like truly outright conflict, there's a general sort of like psychological need to face adversity and be tough and shit that a lot of men experience.
I do think that one of the reasons our culture is so fucking insane is because there really isn't any good outlet for it. And so a lot of that reaction that we witness in our culture right now where there's all these people who are like, we're reclaiming masculinity.
And to them, that means supporting a president who puts kids in cages to get raped and all this other like, it implies being a monster. And I think that's like, it illustrates how little of like a meaningful, useful, valid framework for that sort of like state of being that is real, that can't be denied.
There is in our culture. And so like that, you know, it comes out, it comes out as kind of like a pure reaction, you know, like an antagonism towards any form of compassion, basically, which is deeply ironic because cruelty is weakness.
And, you know, these people, these people, I think, have really actually like a total disconnect from any sense of like manhood that is integrated and meaningful. But anyway, like the point I'm trying to make is that like the elephant social structure, where males get to go off and and like kind of do their thing.
But it's not the determining that their behavioral dynamics aren't like the determining factor for the entirety of society is I think really interesting and illustrative. And, you know, I know that I'm not alone in the egalitarian political landscape and thinking that that's, you know, these these
dynamics are going to play out somehow or another. And in our society, they've been kind of repressed or or like forced upon people in a really insidious way. And so that manifests how it manifests. But but that there there has to be some pathway to expression of some of these tendencies.
Anyway, the presence of the presence in these all male groups of these older of these older elephants greatly prolongs the the time of onset of a particular state in an elephant's life called a male elephant's life called must, which has a fun etymology, it's derived from a Persian word for drunkenness.
That's fun. But it's a time when male elephants go super crazy. The the levels of hormones in their circulating in their bloodstreams associated with like aggression and reproductive competition testosterone and whatnot increased by like 60 times or more.
And some individuals, it's more than double that like 140 times more of these hormones will be circulating in their blood. They become hyper aggressive. It's it's the time when they're contending for dominance, and for reproductive opportunities. And if they don't, if they if they are around older, more dominant males,
then the onset of must is when they're in their like mid 20s. Maybe I guess to say the late 20s, like the the average age is 28 years for entering must. But so elephants that lack for this adult male social structure to integrate into and develop in
go into must as early as like 17 years old, you know, more more than 10 years earlier than typical and they, they enter like a form of it that is just an incoherent, like state of aggression with no, no like behavioral contextualization and no like kind of species typical cues being exchanged
for aggression to occur. And it's fucking crazy. So they kill each other at rates that are totally atypical for elephant societies. So in in a park in ambasoul in ambasoli park where where elephant social structure is relatively intact, mortality data over a few
decades reveals only like 6.1% of adult male male killings out of four, you know, so out of 49 incidences where the cause of death was known 6.1% of them. So that's three cases were were like two male elephants fighting and one of those male elephants killing
another one. Now in Addo Elephant National Park in South Africa, where there is a very atypical social structure, 70 to 90% of adult male elephant deaths were from from male male conflicts. So you know, just becomes like by far the most prevalent way that elephants died just murdering
another left and right. And then, and so to quote from a paper about that, in all cases described individuals exhibiting abnormal behaviors were either translocated co-orphans progeny of co-survivors, or reared under highly irregular herd structures.
The hyper aggressive co-orphans sustained multiple major attachment disruptions and relational trauma, i.e. loss of mother and alo mothers, premature weaning, witness to family deaths, herd dissolution, translocation during periods when critical patterning of brain development occurs.
Neurobiologically, their hyper aggression is consistent with an intense state of amygdala hypothalamic sympathetic hyper arousal in a weakened higher right orbital frontal inhibitory system associated with impaired developmental trauma.
And then another aspect of another abnormality associated with this is that males will enter a must in like synchronously with one another. It's just like part of all their cycles of must overlap. So they're all ready to like fight and fuck at the same time, which is, you know, probably a pretty, it's a better system than what happens in the absence of these social structures where the cycles just don't overlap.
And so it's like some elephants are not feeling particularly aggressive and others are just like ready to kill everything they see. And then it gets even darker and weirder because in a couple of parks, male elephants that have developed in really abnormal social structures have started killing other species and raping other species, particularly rhinoceroses.
So and it's happened a lot. There's like, what was it? Something like 100 rhinoceros deaths in this one park. I read a paper specifically about its incidence in this one park and it was incredible. The rate of killing was incredible.
Here's what one paper said about this phenomenon. Attempts by young male elephants to copulate with rhinoceroses are behaviors associated with extremely elevated states of central and autonomic arousal.
When sensory processing abilities become impaired and induce an inability to differentiate species specific sexual signals from intra-species aggressive pheromone signals, behaviorally such trauma induced neuroendocrinological compromise is manifest as an abnormal fusion of affective, defensive, fear motivated rage combined with elements of frustrated intense sexual drive.
The adolescent elephants elevated affective arousal states may have been particularly acute given the premature and sustained must they entered in the absence of older bulls.
I looked at a bunch of pictures of the rhinoceroses that elephants have raped and killed in these few parks in Africa. It's nuts. It's exactly the antithesis of the nature documentary about the elephants as the gentle wise creatures who shed the tears.
And remember, visit the bones of their relatives and cradle the bones of their relatives in their trunks and listen to each other's calls across vast distances with their feet feeling the vibrations in the ground.
The wise ancient grandmother who remembers the one place where there's water during the dry season, but they're very fucking well is. These animals contain multitudes and they contain a behavioral program for unhinged aggression.
It's there. There's just thresholds and developmental processes that will favor it or regulate it and structure it in certain ways.
Then the final thing to note is that this heightened aggression that elephants are exhibiting most certainly applies to humans and it seems to apply to humans in a pretty like focused, like intentful kind of way in some cases.
So to quote a New York Times piece called an elephant breakdown, it has long been apparent that every large land based animal on this planet is ultimately fighting a losing battle with humankind.
And yet entirely befitting of an animal was such a highly developed sensibility, a deep rooted sense of family, and yes, such a good long term memory, the elephant is not going out quietly.
It is not leaving without making some kind of statement. One to which scientists from a variety of disciplines, including human psychology are now beginning to pay close attention.
So here's from Gay Bradshaw's book on the phenomenon of rapidly increasing elephant aggression towards humans.
Today, violent outbursts in elephants are not anomalous. Elephant clashes with other species are not limited to rhinoceroses.
The extent of discord between elephant and people has warranted the coining of the acronym HEC for human elephant conflict.
In Nepal, killings of humans by herbivorous elephants outnumber those by predator tigers.
Elsewhere in Africa, such as in Sierra Leone, where humans and elephants have a history of peaceful coexistence, some 300 villagers left their homes because of quote unprovoked,
unquote elephant attacks and damage. Disturbingly, new patterns of aggression are not limited to the male of the species.
Female elephants have been observed to uncharacteristically leave their calves vulnerable in order to charge tourists.
The ethologist Delia and Mark Owens, authors of Cry of the Kalahari, have noted that some other elephants ignore their distressed or endangered infants.
The cries of young who have strayed from the herd's protection go unheeded.
Other behavioral oddities include social aloofness among herd members, something else completely uncharacteristic of the close knit family values oriented elephant society,
in which group members retain their deep connection with frequent affectionate caresses and thoughtful inquiries by serpentine trunks.
According to the forest conservator in the wildlife circle of Dharanda in India, increased human populations and reduced elephant habitat have caused a dramatic rise in human-elephant conflict.
As forests become more fragmented and degraded or are converted to monoculture plantations, both elephant feeding and migratory patterns are disrupted.
The results are sadly predictable.
A herd of 13 to 18 elephants killed 7 people during one 5 month period.
Another herd of about 60 elephants killed 11 people in 1988 and another 12 in 1989.
The Inspector General of Forests and Director of Project Elephant in India echoes the same concern.
There were 67 human deaths in 2006 through 2007 and 91 deaths in 2005 through 2006 in the Jharkhand region as a result of conflict with wild elephants.
These numbers come to an annual average of 250 deaths when all eastern states are totaled.
Statistics and testimonies can no longer be argued away as unfortunate, aberrational events or whimsical stories.
People who have lived with elephants for generations report rampant conflict, serious trouble with wild elephant herds, and angry wild elephants attacking the locals.
Elephant behavior has changed.
A forest worker, Dibhojit Saikeya says earlier if they saw us foresters they would run, but now they don't care even if we open fire or burst bombs.
We could scare them off with searchlights, but now they come after us.
And so this reality could obviously be interpreted according to a number of different morality tales.
If I was just writing literature instead of trying to do a scientific assessment of what possibilities there really are for our species,
this could be where I could just say, yeah, go elephants.
Now they're finally angry enough.
The threshold for massive, long and indiscriminate aggression has finally been crossed and now the elephants are fighting back.
I'm an aging earth first.
I grew up reading all those good earth first journal accounts of octopus dismantles,
like ship propeller or whatever, like animals fighting back.
Great.
But obviously this is just like a really complex reality.
And so here I want to start talking about the homologies between elephants' developmental context and responses to trauma and capacities for aggression and those found in our own species.
And for this I'm going to rely on a few different sources, but one in particular that I found really useful was this paper by the author of the book I've been quoting, Gaye Bradshaw.
This paper is called How Elephants Are Opening Doors, Developmental Neuroethology, Attachment and Social Context.
I'm going to quote from the introduction to this paper where she says,
The primary goal of this review is to describe the coalescence of theories of behavior across disciplines in the emergence of trans species models of brain and behavior.
The neuro-ethological analysis of non-normative elephant behavior illustrates how integrative models of psychobiology and ethology find congruence with what we already know about core psychophysiological homologies among all mammals.
Aggression and attachment, both key elements in the elephant narrative, are specific examples where such cross species research is well established.
What may have appeared in the past as behavioral isolates now make up the fabric of a coherent conceptual framework for describing both humans and animals.
And so that's this point that I assume people who are listening to this podcast understand this, but I want to make it really explicitly right now.
This isn't a literary experiment. I'm not referring when I talk about similarities between the behavior of other animals and our own behavior.
I'm not talking about analogies. I'm not saying, oh look, the elk fight on the mountain, their horns clash mightily.
We should be like the elk and fight back against our destruction. I'm saying when the elk fight, the same brain regions are involved doing the same things as when we fight.
I'm trying to describe actual homologies, like areas of very direct continuity. All mammals and to some extent, so-called higher animals in general, have a bunch of brain structures and neurological and behavioral and physiological processes that are just the same.
They're just shared across species where these have not been the targets of selection that's radically altered these structures.
And so in this case of elephants and humans, some of the pathways that we know that are involved are the HPA axis and connections between the amygdala, the hippocampus and parts of the forebrain.
So for instance, there was a 2013 paper that found a linear correlation between changes in brain structure and experiences of abuse, experiences of child abuse in a population of adults.
And so these brain structure changes were changes in the degree of connectivity, the degree of functional connectivity between the amygdala, the hippocampus and the ventromedial prefrontal cortex.
I'm currently wading through a neuroscience textbook and I'm definitely learning some new things about brain structure and activity as I go.
But these are brain regions that certainly I've been familiar with for a long time and I think a lot of the public has some sense of what they do.
We can kind of imagine this as like a circuit where the amygdala produces fear and rage and aggression and the hippocampus is involved in learning and memory and these two structures are very close.
So the amygdala is kind of always there.
The hippocampus provides kind of like an inhibitory and contextualizing function for the amygdala, which is just sort of always there doing its thing.
It's just responding to every stimulus being like, ah, no, I should kill that. I'm terrified of that.
And then the hippocampus is like, you've seen that before, that's not a snake, that's a garden hose or whatever, right?
And then all that dialogue gets moved up to the prefrontal cortex where more abstract thought and contextualization and reasoning about the stimulus or the response to the stimulus or whatever occurs.
And so you can see how elephants are opening doors talks about a pretty similar neurological circuit that gets changed when elephant developmental context is altered and how in both cases it's been described for humans and elephants,
the degree of connectivity between certain brain regions is diminished when there isn't the functional social context like neurogenesis and synaptogenesis actually require, it's really intense.
It's like this remarkable, the formation of neural connections requires social connections. There's something very deep and elegant there, right?
And so these do not get generated when organisms develop in abnormal species atypical contexts.
But I also think because we earlier were talking about the developmental context and the experience of adversity as a pretty necessary component of developing a healthy degree of resilience and healthy capacities for exertion and the experience of difficulty.
So here we have really gotten into this realm of fabulous complexity that is really what I was trying to get at with this episode which I've covered a bunch of subjects that are really complex and just sort of mostly brush that complexity to the side as I've gone through this episode.
This is the complexity that I'm not trying to brush to the side which is just that there is this reality that adverse experience, difficulty and stress is actually a developmental necessity.
But then there's sort of, we can think of like a narrow wedge, like a sort of optimum amount of difficulty and adversity before it becomes too much and really dysfunctional behavior results.
One of the things that's interesting about this is this is one of the many realms of analysis, one of the many aspects of reality that there is a little bit of an ideological bias in terms of people wanting to talk about or discuss or acknowledge at all.
So talking about the fact that you grow stronger through hardship is something that a lot of people with egalitarian perspectives don't like because it's so frequently used to justify various inequalities and atrocities or whatever.
In ways that I just find manifestly absurd, I don't think it's actually that complex to grapple with these, the fact that people are so opposed to the redistribution of wealth because they are attached to these narratives about how you should confront your hardship and no matter where you come from.
If you're just tough enough, you can probably make things better for yourself.
Taking that narrative and trying to use it to justify the existence of the billionaires who actually run our lives, these weak, pathetic monsters who just have these absurd excesses that they absolutely have not done anything,
has not exerted a proportional amount of effort to obtain at all.
It's pretty ridiculous, but it is the case that there has been a right-wing monopoly on toughness, on discussions about resilience and discussions about how having fucked up experiences makes you more resilient and gives you more agency in certain ways.
I think that's really, really too bad because again, there's just so much complexity here.
I wish that we could have more complex discussions, more interesting discussions about these realities, but certainly it's not true.
Like Nietzsche said, that which does not kill you makes you stronger, and certainly that's not always true.
The people who have more hierarchical attitudes tend to really emphasize the aspects of life where that is true and to really try to overlook or ignore the aspects of life where it isn't true.
A couple episodes ago, we talked about infant monkeys being reared without maternal contact, and it didn't kill them, but it's really, really difficult to see how anybody could make the case that that shit made them stronger.
It turned them into perpetually fearful, socially and emotionally broken animals for the rest of their lives.
We could make the obvious, like we made the parallel before with plants, just on the purely physical level developing in a greenhouse as opposed to outdoors.
The physical parallels with the psychological and behavioral domains.
I got some weights in my bedroom, and if I lift a certain amount of weight, it's going to produce a minor injury in my muscle which will be rapidly repaired and I'll get stronger.
But then if I tried to lift like 600 pounds or whatever, it would just break me. It would not make me stronger.
So Gay Bradshaw uses the terminology an envelope of tolerance to stress to talk about this, quoting,
Stress becomes harmful only when our expectations are not met by the environment in which we live and we are unable to adjust to the actual conditions.
Every species and individual has its own psychological, emotional and physical envelope of tolerance to which each has adapted and functions well.
To a greater or lesser extent, everyone is vulnerable to the same stressors, the fear of death and threats, whether in the form of a lion or of an angry supervisor.
But just as each person and animal has a unique body type, each has a unique psychological type.
An elephant's body and mind are equipped to handle environmental stress differently than are the body and mind of a lion or a turtle or a human.
So there's actually two really important notions there.
One is the idea of an envelope of tolerance, like I said, the hypothetical optimum level of adversity, difficulty, stress, whatever that allows an organism to develop into its most resilient form.
And this fact just confuses so many conversations about the human experience and what's right and wrong.
People overlook this to their profound detriment, but we can't talk about this envelope of tolerance or an optimum level of developmentally, optimum level of adversity to experience.
In purely abstract terms of like, well, what's the more or less brutal thing that happened to somebody?
We have this real tendency to think in those terms, to think in just like in abstract terms of like, well, that sounds harder than that.
So if I was able to deal with that, you should have been able to deal with that.
And that just totally overlooks the fact that there's actually like species typical developmental needs that we have that really are so, so divorced from our abstract conceptions of what something that's truly brutal or difficult,
like what a truly significant hardship looks like, right?
Like in the case of elephants, you know, it's like they go absolutely nuts if they don't get to touch trunks with other elephants while they're growing up.
They don't get to like cuddle with a bunch of aunts and like, you know, like a bunch of unrelated adult females as they're developing.
They go totally fucking nuts if they don't get to be, if they're males, if they don't get to be in these all male groups with older males.
And that might not sound like like an elephant might have to like wander for two weeks without water or whatever, like fight off some crocodiles.
You know, like, like some other things might happen that we would look at and we would subjectively think like, wow, that like those are brutal experiences.
Like you got to be tough to deal with that.
And then we create this very arbitrary hierarchy where we're like, if you were tough enough to deal with that, you should have been tough enough to deal with that.
And then we do this in human societies comparing individuals who've had just totally different experiences and any coherent conception of like what our developmental needs are,
like what our intrinsic species typical like behavioral experiential sort of like paradigms are, you know, we could we would see some experiences as really, really damaging that in an abstract hierarchy of just like this is really brutal,
this is less brutal, we would tend to really diminish or not see the significance of you know, like like growing up.
I mean, we live in a society where people are experiencing massive, like, you know, there's an epidemic of psychological breakdowns, just from like loneliness, right, and from various forms of alienation that in isolation that pervade our societies.
And a lot of them don't really sound like they don't sound like hardcore things, right.
You know, like, it's not like, yeah, I grew up with somebody beating me, it's not like yeah, and then I was in prison or whatever right.
And so, like we have these hierarchies of adversity in our head that don't make a lot of sense.
And it would we would really vastly benefit from from having explicit and like pretty richly detailed conceptions of the species typical developmental needs that that people have that are or not being met in various situations.
Therein, I remember having a conversation with a friend of mine who grew up in the suburbs in like total alienation right and she had she had a lot of experiences of abuse but she she didn't really have she's like 10 years younger than me so she grew up in a very different world and
and she grew up like middle class and like I said in the suburbs, you know, like just in like very different places and times and cultures than I experienced.
And, you know, like the abuse she experienced in her early life was not anywhere near as severe as the like very, very, very extreme abuse that I experienced as a young person.
But, you know, like this one evening we were talking and she was talking about her her experience of growing up.
And I said to her, you know, like I really I really see how your childhood was actually harder than mine in really important ways because I experienced a whole lot of like raw brutality.
And it was actually like really like cinematic brutality, like I can talk to people about it and people are like, Wow, you're a hard motherfucker for still being alive, right?
So first of all, first of all, like it just like it falls into that terrain like I was saying where like we are abstract conceptions of like a survivor come into play and that that provides its own self esteem boost.
But then also like, just because of where and when I was growing up, as soon as I was like any kind of like any kind of autonomous entity, like you know, like when I was still very, very young, I started just totally running wild and forming really deep connections with like other feral
children who are escaping other horrible situations right so like my brain, my brain developed in the context like, you know, a lot more like the elephants species typical social structures that I was describing like I grew up around a bunch of people who were older than me who had been through a lot of
shit. And we all like, we were all kind of like a tribe or a family or whatever and we had insane adventures. And that actually I think in so many ways, for as much as I dealt with things that were just like shockingly difficult, I think it was honestly a lot better for me than having lower key
experiences of abuse. But then my social connections coming from social fucking media. And, you know, right. And like, you know, like, like living in the suburbs and feeling alienated and not feeling like I had a family. And like all like all that stuff like all that just like kind of typical landscape of American
alienation stuff on top of an experience of abuse. This complexity is infinite. I guess what I'm ultimately trying to get at is a sense of like what types of adversity would sort of like compel people with egalitarian political perspectives to find their capacities for aggression, right.
And realistically, we also just have to talk about trade offs, we have to talk about a pretty wide range of adverse experiences that don't really like, it's not just like the magnitude and the, you know, like as long as it's within a certain range of like developmentally normal experiences and the magnitude of the
adversity is like in the right range, you know, then you come out resilient. Because like what's really true is that if you have different experiences of stress, trauma, adversity, you just end up with this really complex set of tradeoffs, you develop certain
proficiencies and you lose other proficiencies. I always think about this description in this book by this anthropologist. I think his last name is just pronounced bourgeois. I don't know how to pronounce that guy's last name, but it just looks a lot like bourgeois.
Anyway, he wrote an ethnography about selling crack called In Search of Respect, selling crack in the El Barrio. And he talks about one of his primary informants ran this crew, right, he was like the boss of this like gnarly crack dealing
crew in some really rough neighborhood, and how after he got to know this guy really well, like after they had developed a pretty substantial degree of trust, the dude came to him one day, really like visibly embarrassed and he was like, yo, I would really like your help getting an ID.
And at first the guy didn't really know, the anthropologist didn't really know what kind of help this guy wanted. And eventually he realized that the dude was actually just really terrified to go down to the DMV and to try to deal with that aspect of civilization,
have those kind of difficult experiences, which nobody likes, like everybody kind of acknowledges as like, it's like a little anxiety inducing a difficult chaotic experience, whatever. But for him, it was like, I mean, he did not have a driver's license and he wasn't young, and he had never been able to do it because it just like the thought of it paralyzed him so much.
And you know, and the author talks about this, how he's like, this guy is tough, like this guy can do all these things that I and most of the people who are ever going to read this will never be able to do, which is just off the table, like, like we're just like, yeah, we're not that like crazy and tough, right, but he can't go to the DMV.
And that's such a perfect illustration of how like, there's just this really complex set of tradeoffs and it's really hard to make anybody who's trafficking and just like monolithic generalizations about stuff like this is just really not looking at all the complexity that's there.
Another like, particularly like a lot more relevant really example is comes from like the kind of like dual nature of PTSD in combat vets, who were, you know, like kind of a lot of the original source material for the study of PTSD in general.
But you know, like, like, it is classically the case that vets come home from war and are not very functional people in this in this society. And there's a bunch of reasons for that.
There's I really can't recommend highly enough that book tribe by Sebastian Younger where he talks about that and about how it's not all it's not all like it can't all be thought of just as like trauma like it like a maladaptive response to an overwhelming stimulus that you can't come to terms with or whatever
like some of the reason that vets have so much trouble coming home from war is because they've actually touched something that's much more characteristic of like our evolved psychological like needs for, you know, like a tight community and like a sense of competence in the face of
a sense of like significant purpose and competence and authenticity, right? You know, so like, it's really hard in all those ways. And I think that a lot of people who have spent a lot of time on front lines in moments of significant social rupture, direct action, whatever, like showdowns with the police over and over again, have had really similar experiences of of like not really being able to deescalate and kind of like finding that they're
actually traveling to conflict zones. I mean, you know, like in part because that's what they believe in and what they're good at but also in part because the only other option is to like deescalate and come to terms with with all the, you know, like with the way you are and to try to like find some meaning and
going to work and watching television and all the rest, you know, and like, it's like, it's really, really, really hard to do. But so like, you know, you have on the one hand, people people who have experienced combat or people who can't can't deescalate from from like living in the
tear gas here in the United States of America for sustained periods of time. And like, you know, like we're just broken idiots, like we like can't function in really simple ways will like yell at you for no reason and like we won't we won't show up on time for things like you know, like we're just
like we're just messes. But then if there's an emergency situation, we're exactly the people that you want around. And obviously, if people have been in combat, like, you know, then those are the people that you really really want around in combat, right.
And so like, again, like, we are talking when we talk about whether adversity will make us stronger, we're just totally talking about a really complex set of trade offs. There's there's no other way to there's no other way to look at it.
And then a final thing that I want to say is that just in terms of, in terms of the question of whether egalitarians can find their aggression. I've mentioned this study, I think, once before once or twice before, but there was this fascinating study that kind of replicated the like very famous
Silver Fox domestication experiments that I've definitely referenced a bunch. It was done with mice. And as with the Silver Fox experiments, the researchers took an initial population of mice and found the very least aggressive individuals and then just kind of selectively bred them for reduced aggression, until
they had a population that was very, very unaggressive and retained a bunch of juvenile traits into adulthood. You know, so, so that was like the another replication of like the, you know, of this correlated set of changes that we observe in all organisms, including
I contend humans, which predicts political orientation. But he then took some of these like very low aggression mice and put them back into the population of high aggression mice. And so they were early in life, right, while they were still developing.
So they fought, they had to fight. And the experience of fighting turned them into just as good a fighters as any of the other mice. So, right, so like their baseline behavior was much less aggressive. Their default behavioral paradigm was not to get into fights all the time for no good reason.
But if exposed to repetitive instances where they had to fight, they were fighters just like everybody, every other member of their species, right? So I do think that what we are experiencing now, and what we are probably going to experience in the future is going to be terrible.
It's going to be really terrible. And it's really going to hurt. And nothing that we say about what it means, or how it changes us or what we do with it, negates that or diminishes it at all. It's going to really hurt. It's going to be fucking terrible.
But I do think that the terrible traumas that we are very likely to experience are likely to induce, again, a set of trade offs, a set of changes which we will not regard as monolithically good or bad, but which will make us more capable of finding the parts of ourselves that are necessary to find.
To respond to what's going on, and to maybe not let these fucking people annihilate us.
Now that you've listened to me for however long it's been, well over an hour, I guess now is where I say that I don't really have a thesis beyond that.
Rather than presenting a specific thesis like this, if we do X then Y will occur, X is what's necessary for the great revolutionary Y to manifest or whatever.
I'm more presenting a frame in the sense of I'm not trying to indicate what conclusions to draw from the variables. I'm just trying to orient people to what I think some of the right variables are to be thinking about as we all contemplate this increasingly inevitable seeming conflict
that is coming to define the society we live in and seems like it will shape a whole lot of the social, political, ecological realities that we inhabit in the immediate and in the long term futures.
So that is the episode friends. Thank you so much for listening.
If you've been hanging in there with me, if you've been steadily listening to these episodes, I'd just like to say thank you for sticking with me the last kind of essentially almost all of nature and nurture death spiral and the episode after.
I definitely had a post-breakup, always intoxicated phase of the podcast and that was just where I was at and I wasn't really trying to hide it and in fact at least one person, hey Alex, did in fact comment that they could tell that I was pretty intoxicated while I was doing those episodes.
I was just kind of like, yeah, I think that the two options are to either not do this at all or to take various substances that make me feel less pain and do some episodes that sound a lot like a person who's on a few different drugs recording in a closet somewhere.
And that's what I did and I'm not sorry because this life is hard and a lot of us are in a lot of pain and I think that's really just okay to acknowledge.
I think that the content of those episodes was good. I'm actually very proud of what they contain. I just do think the execution was characteristically that of a somewhat broken and deliriously high person.
That just is what it is but time heals all-ish as long as you survive for long enough to kind of heal and your wounds don't make you behave in ways that just perpetuate more wounds.
But anyway, I feel like I'm on another very productive and certainly less intoxicated phase of fight like an animal. Ever onward, friends? Alright, take care.
Are human rights come from God? Not government? Brainwash? Puppet? You were sent? You liberals asked? Really, really strange but magikids are now in the game.
Unity and peace is our prize. We hold our president way up high like an eagle. We will take fight in God. We trust. Magikids fight in God. We trust.