Title: Heal Like an Animal Interview With Joshua Sylvae pt 3
Episode #: 30
Episode ID: 8771613
Source: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/8771613-heal-like-an-animal-interview-with-joshua-sylvae-pt-3.mp3
------------------------------------------------------------

=== EPISODE METADATA ===
Generated: 2026-01-12 01:02:06
Episode ID: 5627911
MP3 File: 5627911-do-not-worship-the-deities-that-came-before-the-fire.mp3
Title: Untitled Episode
Podcast/Artist: Against the Internet
Album/Series: Fight Like An Animal: Biology and Politics
Source URL: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/5627911-do-not-worship-the-deities-that-came-before-the-fire.mp3
========================
And they have cans of soup. Soup. And they've thrown the cans of soup. That's better than a wreck because you can't throw a wreck. It's too heavy. The cans of soup can do it. It's a problem.
Come on.
It's incredible. We have people coming over with bags of soup, big bags of soup, and they're laying in the ground, and the anarchists take it, and they start throwing it at our cops at our police.
Greetings friends, I'm Arnold Schroeder and this is Fight Like An Animal.
This is the third year that there has been smoke ubiquitously on the west coast, blocking
out the sun, giving us all a sense of imminent collapse, you know, every major city kind
of situation. And all three of those times that's occurred have been within the last four years.
In fact, so it was 2017 and 2018. And then as a really powerful indication of the shifting
baseline syndrome, you know, I honestly was kind of surprised in 2019 when the thing that had
only happened twice before ever smoke being everywhere, there being nowhere on the west
coast to go where you could really breathe or see down the block. You know, I was surprised
that that didn't happen. And then boy, did it happen again this year. And it fucks people
up in ways that are sort of beyond apparently anybody, anybody I talked to anyways, powers
of articulation. It's kind of surprising for a lot of people how impactful it really is.
It tends to completely negate any circadian rhythm anybody might possess, which I don't,
I mean, I don't, it's really interesting phenomenon. I don't think it can be reduced
entirely to a change in the light regime. It's like, sure, you can't see the sun.
I guess it makes sense that you just like lose any relationship today or night in your
sleep schedule. But I don't know, I mean, I've lived in the Pacific Northwest, west of the
Cascades more of my life than anywhere else. And until eight years ago, it was eight, seven
years ago, 2013 was our driest winter on record at the time. And nothing's really
ever been the same since then. But until then, it really was true that it rained
nine months of the year. And that didn't have that effect on on people. And, but yeah, for
whatever reason, like 24 hours of smoke, people lose any kind of connection to it, like, whatever
their past rhythm was with sleep, or in a lot of cases, any rhythm at all, just sleep
in totally random intervals at totally random times. And, you know, people just find
themselves being really defeated by it. Like people, you know, people who are all living in
the same world we were living in before smoke blocked out the sun, who are like, Yeah, seems
like the end is really imminent. And, you know, like I've been grappling with the
emotional and psychological repercussions of knowing the world is dying for a long
time. And usually I can wake up and make myself do things, you know, people who
are perfectly aware of all of the like breathtaking and very exhausting and
defeating crises that we're already facing find themselves in the smoke incapable of
functioning in the most basic ways. And I have to say, I'm I'm right there. You know,
when I say people, I'm emphatically talking about myself, but it's something
it's something that everybody I'm talking to virtually is having some version of this
experience. So in honor of the ecological dread that is gripping so many of us
right now, I thought that I would read my piece for the Dark Mountain Journal do
not worship the deities that came before the fire. So it'd be kind of a mini
episode. Dark Mountain is really one of the only print, maybe kind of the only
print publication that I know of that a lot of people that I know actually
read and care about. And that a lot of like different kinds of people that I
know, I mean, in a sense, it's like this really niche thing, I guess, you know,
it's if you look at all the different range of like subcultures that are out
there, it's not like they, I guess, have a huge audience. But yeah,
interestingly, like a lot of people I know, both from political circles and
elsewhere, really value Dark Mountain. Because I think there is just like
this very big psychological need that a lot of people have for there to be
explicit conversations about what's happening. And for something that is
engaged with the ecological crisis, but doesn't insist on telling us that if
we act now or, you know, we support the candidate who supports the Green
New Deal or whatever, everything is going to be okay. And that kind of is
what this piece is about. I have this notion of climate responsiveness
curve, you know, or something like some, I mean, whatever, I don't have like an
actually very explicit conceptualization of of like how one would visualize this
kind of like continuum, this like response continuum that I have in my
head, but I have this notion that there are stages of integration of the
psychological truth of the ecological crisis, right? And that somewhere on that
curve, you know, that at first it's just like it's like merely acknowledging the
the magnitude, the eminence, and of course, inevitably desperately scrambling
through different like cycling through different ideas about how it can be
like negated or radically diminished. And I think that it really wasn't until
2017 until that year that we had ubiquitous smoke on the West Coast while
there were just storms devastating these coasts in the South that there was
like any significant shift in public opinion pulling about like concern about
climate change at all ever in history. But you could see then and you can
see in these other moments like right now and when all these fires are burning,
there's a lot of people who just get to that kind of I guess what I would
describe as an initial stage, you know, where they're like, what should we do
about this? This is going to be terrible. Like they're just actually
thinking about it, you know, and so whether or not I mean, you know, like
so the ideas are just kind of like people at that point like cycle
through really elementary ideas, people are like, you know, maybe we should
build a movement and the movement should pressure policymakers or whatever,
right? People have that kind of, you know, and then there's there's all these
other like degrees of integration. But I think that at some point, one stops
having that kind of negotiation with reality about the scope of the
consequences. And one begins to accept as an emotional and psychological
truth that the very worst is totally possible. And of course, nobody knows
the future. But but I think to face the future means to come to terms
with the worst case scenarios. And I think that that's actually the only
way that we can like that we can gain the agency to engage in such a
way that whatever chances we have of diminishing those consequences will
actually like pursue those chances. Coming to terms with our fears allows us
a degree of adaptability that we otherwise don't possess. Even if
you're a full time climate activist, and you wake up every day and you you
do 16 hours of climate work as as I have done for years at a time, you
know, if you haven't come to terms with the outcomes, then to some degree at
least, even if what you're doing might be partially useful to some degree at
least, what you're doing is providing yourself a way to not come to
terms with that. And that means that you're going to be inhabiting
this psychological reality that doesn't have as much like a flexibility
to incorporate actual, you know, reality into it. And I just like
illustrate this from my own perspective and contextualize the writing of this
piece. The first of these fire, like really big fire seasons on the
West Coast, the 2017 one, I was blockading trains when it started. And
it was, you know, I was organizing train blockades. I was standing by
some railroad tracks, watching smoke begin to obscure the sky. And and you
know, like I can remember I was desperately overworked and kind of
falling apart in every conceivable regard, really. I mean, I mean, I was
just exactly the way people get when they've been when they've been like
really heavy in some like direct action kind of confrontations for a
really long time. I was just exhausted. And, you know, so I can
remember this is like, this is like one of the moments in the biopic. And
you know, like as I go through life, I accumulate moments where I'm like, I
would put that in the biopic that they don't probably intend to make
about me. And you know, that that would be a moment for the biopic is
like, I actually like collapsed next to some railroad tracks that I was
trying to blockade oil trends on and like wept at the smoke obscuring the
sky and was like, I have failed, you know, and then and it really it really
was right around then that that the organizing kind of slowed down
because I think I had been in a desperate frenetic pace with it for
a bunch of years because I felt like the feedback so that we were
getting to or were kind of at the tipping points. And then, you
know, that that was kind of when I realized that probably forests were
going to become more of a source rather than a sink for carbon dioxide,
which somebody wrote a scientific paper about the next year and said that
exactly that was happening. And yeah, yeah, so I I really did start to
like, stop doing as much of that kind of work. And I really dove into
policy in a big way. I did climate policy meta analysis. And I tried to
write climate policy platforms that, you know, some kind of broad
movement I cycled through infinite projects with so many different
people who did some really good work. But but it kind of, you know, but I
didn't feel it never after that point did I feel like I did
anything that really had much of like a noticeable public impact at
the same scale as the stuff I had been doing, because there just was
that fundamental difference that previously I'd been really convinced
that even if it killed me, it was worthwhile to to like, you know,
organize lots of people and do these big things and get lots of like
attention and and until I really build a movement per se, and and
have as much of like a social impact and register as possible. And I
was a lot less convinced of that after that. And so 2018 in my
grief, I ended up in California, I've been living, I left this
farm I've been living on in Northern Washington, and came down
here and just looked at the fires that have burned the year
before and just kind of marveled at them, you know, I like, I just
like went to some really big fires and walked around and and
uttered breathless exclamations. And 2018, I also got
nice and cozy with the campfire hung out in some of the worst
air quality in the world. And then, and I wrote this, this
thing that I'm going to read. And then, and then in 2019, there
were a whole bunch of other things that I tried and places that
I moved and people that I was with. But at some point, I
started realizing that the the thing that felt meaningful to
do at this point, was to start looking into all that science
around negative emissions. Because, you know, I had always
sort of just discounted it before I was like, no, I mean,
that's, that's insanely risky. We have no idea if any of it
will work. The you know, like what what there's a very clear
moral imperative to do is to just stop emissions. And that
that was absolutely true that that position was 100%
correct. But I think that it's kind of irrelevant now, I think
that if we stop all carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gas
emissions today, that we probably will still get the
greatest extinction the earth has ever seen. And so, you know,
I started kind of getting ready to go back to school to do a
bunch of real technical negative emissions kind of stuff that
would give me a foundation for negatives and emissions work of
some variety, wrote a big literature review about it. And
and so I guess like I was just I relayed all this to illustrate
that idea that when one comes to terms with the reality of
ecological collapse, it allows for a certain adaptability,
whether or not anything I was doing in any one of those phases
was a good idea, strategic or smart or whatever, wise,
meaningful anything. It is at least the case that there were all
these different phases that I've been extremely versatile in my
response to the situation because the situation has
empirically changed so much in the course of the couple
decades that I've been engaged in working on it. And so yeah,
that's that's my idea of like a climate responsiveness
curve or whatever is that at some point, you have to come
to terms with this like with the worst case scenario and for me
that like the the entire year of 2018 was just sort of like a
death spiral because I was coming to terms with it and
because my entire identity was constituted around trying to
intervene in the climate crisis. So I also just kind of had
you know, I mean, it got like harder and harder to know
what I was even really supposed to like do on a given day,
it wasn't a good time, you know, and I still had that like, the
mobility, you know, I was a nomadic organizer. So like I just
kind of kept moving around and put like a lost any kind of
like really had to deal with a lot of darkness like a lot of
like, kind of my great fear with climate change was always
that I was going to lose all love for humanity before it was
all over, you know, and that's kind of like, I kind of got to
that place more than I ever had before or really have sense. And
you know, like, like it was what I'm saying is that there's all
kinds of reasons one would want to not do that. But I think
that it's actually just so important that we become one
with our pain on this. And we really, really, really
confront what hurts us the most here, because I think it's it's
the only way to, to like, actually fashion a response. So
that's this is, this is not a long piece. I think that I think
that I spent more time framing it, then it will require for me to
read it. So without further delay, do not worship the deities
that came before the fire. When civil rights icon and
former presidential candidate Jesse Jackson wrote a spotted
horse toward the burning barricades on North Dakota State
Highway 1806. I finally started coming to terms with the end of
the world. Naturally, I already knew that epochal transformation
was underway from, say, atmospheric carbon dioxide
concentrations, the extinction rate, or a cursory
assessment of human behavior. But the end of the world is
inherently mythological, as is the human mind. We are creatures
as hopelessly bound to our narratives as we are bound to
our sexuality and our fear of snakes. Jesse Jackson, the
burning tires and burning sage, the tear gas and acoustic
weapons and rocket launchers, the drumming and the war
songs. The moment only seemed plausible. If one imagined it
had been described in prophecy and the prophecy
subsequently forgotten. It was a sufficiently mythological
stimulus to provoke a conclusion that can be
concisely characterized as we are living in the story of the
end of the world. And this was somehow more palpable and
psychologically meaningful than we are living at the end of
the world or the more understated and strictly
accurate. We are witnessing a cataclysm without precedent.
The fires people set that day, 26 October 2016, in an effort to
stop construction of the Dakota Access Pipeline, were
extinguished by the next night. Dreamlike encounters with
celebrity were fairly common at Standing Rock. The
Green Party presidential candidate arrives to
spray paint bulldozers people are locked to, the guy who
plays the Incredible Hulk in the movies, Wanderers Pass Your
Camp. And leaving the barricades as he approached, I
didn't even see Jesse Jackson. I just knew he was
mounted on a horse a mile down the road, preparing to
approach. And the mental image of it in that warlike
context immediately took on a quality roughly akin to a
many armed deity wielding skulls and weapons crowned by
fire. It produced a decisive rupture from whatever
semblance of the former world I was still clinging to.
Less concisely than we are living in the story of the
end of the world, the moment said the world we live in
now will exist in relation to the old one as a dream to
awaken, as an unhinged hallucination to everyday
consciousness. And whoever clings to the prosaic forms and
conventions of the former world will be devoured by the new
gods and monsters that are being birthed in its flames.
Two years later, the impression seems justified.
Clinging to the prosaic forms and conventions of the
former world, people with respectable opinions occupied
themselves during the time we battled the pipeline with
dismissing a reality television star as irrelevant
until that night, 12 nights after police extinguished the
fires when he was elected president of the United
States. It's not a trivial detail that this
decisive bodily sense of global change occurred in the
presence of fire. Scientists and environmentalists
have been refining their language of unprecedented
suffering and intergenerational catastrophe for
decades. In every instance of such communication,
if the criterion for success is that one could walk down a
street somewhere and it would feel like a social
response of any kind was occurring, even one of
mere acknowledgement has failed. Some of the reasons
for this are very immediate, rooted in the
vicissitudes of current and recent politics and
culture, but some of the reasons are fundamental,
rooted in the human mind's intrinsic barriers to
comprehending and functionally integrating the
reality of collapse. Witnessing the fiery
transformation of the highway into a battleground
between what felt like mythical forces that day,
I realized that on some level, despite years of avid
engagement in climate science and having given up
on any semblance of a normal life to fight the
fossil fuel industry full-time, I too was subject to
these intrinsic psychological barriers to
comprehending something so vast. I was in denial
about climate change. The political strategic form
of climate denial, rejecting that it's happening
at all, has somewhat monopolized the term
denial so that we can no longer talk about it in
a more common psychological sense, in the sense that
we simply don't process information that is too
challenging. This can be observed in the ability of
the human mind to completely suppress recollections
of traumatic events, and it can be observed in
non-human minds, in the dazed look that sometimes
comes over prey animal's eyes when they stop
fighting with a predator and mentally depart from
the experience of dying. My fiery revelation
convinced me that for most people, most of the time,
whatever our worldviews, global collapse is simply
beyond our emotional and psychological scope, if it
is presented in non-mythic terms. The moment of
psychological integration I experienced didn't
occur because I was explicitly processing
anguish over a doomed food system or an ocean
populated only by plastic. I'd been doing those
things for years. It occurred because I had a
religious experience, and I didn't have a religious
experience because I was seeking one, but because
of fire. A religious awakening born in fire is
existentially valuable because it allows for
comprehension of what we're experiencing, and it
is also at least potentially utilitarian because
it allows us to overcome paralysis, resulting from
witnessing a truth we haven't come to terms with.
It's the moment we stop negotiating with reality,
stop thinking anything is too terrible to happen,
and accept every outcome as possible. Paradoxically,
this moment of acceptance is also the moment our
capacities become mobilized to affect outcomes.
The human mind can systematically suppress memory of a trauma,
but it can also heal, and when healing occurs,
it is associated with a phase of recovered memory
and acute crisis, where the painful reality becomes
absolute and all-encompassing before losing its power.
One PTSD researcher describes the initiation of recovery as
the moment one ceases rejecting what is happening
and begins to quote, flow with the symptoms. Fire is the stimulus that
allows us to instinctively, corporeally, experience the
global ecological trajectory and thus to flow with the symptoms.
This scientific notion recapitulates an ethical
and spiritual relationship to adversity that is fundamental to a lot of
traditional societies. A perceptual framework that
candidly embraces the unbearable and emphasizes
overcoming pain by confronting it. It's a framework evident in texts like
The Hagakure, which instructs samurai warriors to accept the reality of
death and all its emotional consequences, to meditate on the image of one's own
inevitable corpse and conclude that one is already dead
before going into battle. It's a framework evident in the nurse
Ragnarok prophecy, which tells us that Odin will fight the wolf Fenrir, will
die in that battle, and the wolf will devour the sun,
and tells us this in the form of a prophecy delivered
to Odin, so that he must go into battle to save the world knowing that both
he and the world will die. We don't need to explicitly
recapitulate tradition, and we probably can't.
We need to recapitulate the psychological resilience and agency
tradition conferred on people. We need to witness our own truths and
have our own religious awakenings in response to them.
This statement is not predicated on any supernatural beliefs but on the
understanding that the cross-culturally recurrent modes of
perception that constitute the religious mind
reflect innate properties of human psychology
and that it is the religious mind which engages those realities
like death and the end of the world that other perceptual states cannot
encompass. The religious mind is attained through our
evolved capacities as opposed to external divinity
but it is a distinctive real perceptual state
which can't be described in terms of other domains of human psychology.
One doesn't need to posit a deity to have a religious experience witnessing the
fires that have come into this world. One only needs to witness them without
some interpretive framework that diminishes their truth.
Arguably conditions have recently progressed to a point where a
religious awakening in the presence of ecological collapse is possible
because we've recently entered the era where the planet's behavior
intuitively undeniably feels apocalyptic
regardless of whether people have an interest in environmental
issues or not. 2017 was the first year wildfire
smoked black in the skies over major cities throughout the west coast of
North America and made breathing painful for days on end
and the first year mainstream news outlets consistently
used the adjective apocalyptic to describe the fires with respect to
certain moments like the hazy reddish orange glowing
sky over disneyland or the melted cars and dead
horses of santa rosa california they consistently failed to find
any other. Most people will never have an
emotional response to topics like species interdependencies or methane
reservoirs beneath ice but most people have trouble not coming to a
conclusion like the world is ending in the presence of a fire tornado.
2018 was the year the fire tornado came to california and earnest a
phenomenon of cyclonic winds created by fire which beget more fire
a vortex of flame towering hundreds of feet above the forest
accompanied by a roaring sound that only seems plausible if one imagines it was
first described in prophecy but if all that is required to have a
religious experience is to witness the fires that have come into this world
without some interpretive framework that diminishes their truth
there is certainly no lack of interpretive frameworks to do just that
and many of them have the tragic aspect of belonging to environmentalists
as the 2018 fire tornadoes raged in a more plausible image of god than is to be
found in religious iconography california governor jerry brown
appeared on television to gravely in tone in his best
we must band together to save civilization before it's too late voice
that the fires were unprecedented and that they illustrated
the existential threat of climate change it's difficult to overstate the
extent to which this statement to the public seem likely to diminish
people's sense of both crisis and awe in the face of what they were witnessing
made as it was in the rhetorical modes born in the world as it was before
jesse jackson rode to the burning barricades and a reality television
star became the most powerful person in the world
and disneyland glowed a hellish red the language of co2 emissions
an existential threat simply cannot convey
the elemental truth to be witnessed in the physical world
like myself during the years i fought the fossil fuel industry
jerry brown is someone who is both constantly engaged with the subject of
climate change and in denial about it
environmentalism has a long history of converting intuitive and universal
truths into cryptic and specialized ones long ago the environmental movement
established a trajectory to failure by assuming success
required seeming reasonable in that seeming reasonable meant using science
armed with graphs of co2 concentration curves
and alarming statistics about the rates of deforestation
the environmental movement has experienced constant dismay at people's
adherence to competing less rational cultural frameworks
failing to grasp that we are the very clear inheritors of one of the most
effective modes of irrational reasoning in existence
which says god is enraged god is the wind and god is screaming
god is the fire and god has come to remake this world
crucially however while unprecedented fire goes a long way to convey
wrath and judgment it also conveys beauty and wonder
finding a path through the fire means perceiving the fire with reference
even as it threatens us with destruction even as we give aid to those
who have been displaced by it and grieve for those who have died
it means finding in fire some of the same joy
and sense of connection with something vaster than ourselves
that we find in the contours of mountains shaped by glaciers or the screaming
of a mountain lion it means exalting in the fact
that the same fires that are unleashing extinction
are also destroying the machinery of civilization
the 2018 california fire season achieved for a week with 25 years of
international climate negotiations and more than a decade of state climate
planning never achieved for even a moment
it closed interstate five and the adjacent railroad corridor
fundamental physical predicates of the consumer economy on north america's
west coast one doesn't need to stand directly
before a towering inferno in order to witness its truth
the sense of divinity lingers where fire tornadoes raged in the summer
there is now a landscape in which unique among fire-scarred landscapes i visited
one can walk for days through drainage after drainage
and never once encounter a living tree
there are places with dead trees still bearing their dead needles
places with trees whose needles burned and whole black mountains of
nothing but ash but this is the extent of the variation
the quiet is uncanny and feels almost like the land itself
is still in silent awe of the power of the force that visited it
and the silence spreads to human visitors so that they find themselves
lacking for words other than brief repetitive
phrases of astonishment it is beautiful