Title: Prison and Other Stories Excerpt
Episode #: 43
Episode ID: 10120277
Source: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/10120277-prison-and-other-stories-excerpt.mp3
------------------------------------------------------------

=== EPISODE METADATA ===
Generated: 2026-01-12 01:02:06
Episode ID: 17916019
MP3 File: 17916019-survival-ecology.mp3
Title: Survival Ecology
Podcast/Artist: World Tree Center for Evolutionary Politics
Album/Series: Fight Like An Animal
Source URL: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/17916019-survival-ecology.mp3
========================
From the times of radical demonstrations and radical politics, you notice the connection between danger and
the feeling of being alive. I understood that immediately.
Being friends, I'm Arnold Schroeder and this is Fight Like an Animal.
Coming at you from Portland, Oregon, a city where we all get to feel a little more alive with the deployment of federal troops here last night.
This is a different format of the podcast than has ever occurred before.
This is a live recording of a presentation I gave on last Sunday, September 21st, underneath a bridge, before a ritual black metal band performed.
So arguably the only renegade environmental policy discussion slash ritual black metal show that maybe has been
ever happened in Portland, I don't know, has ever happened anywhere, hard to say.
But there was a working theory for me that I was going to be able to organize events and very consistently podcast.
And I do feel like the event organizing has got good momentum and that I am falling into a pretty decent rhythm of, you know, there was really no like post-event collapse state that I entered or anything like that.
But naturally it was a sort of ambitious endeavor and there did end up being more sort of a logistical burden than allowed for, then was optimal.
And so I'll just say, first of all, profound thanks to my friends returning for coming down from Olympia and performing and severed branches press for coming down and tabling and to Dan and Pith and Megan and seven for helping me with the event.
But yeah, I'll sound different during this presentation than I typically do podcasting and it just is the stress, you know, at that point I was maybe like 65% during a presentation and 35% just sort of like agonizing over event logistics, whatever.
And so there's a sort of a shift in pitch, you know, like you can really sort of hear it in my voice, a lot more lips macking and a lot more use of the word like in totally meaningless contexts than is typical or ideal.
And something I've never really done before had any issue with was this chronic like rubbing my fingers together sound, which I was really actually kind of enjoying during the presentation.
It gave me this sort of like electric, you know, sensation of intense enhanced engagement in what I was doing essentially but certainly left a number of audio artifacts that are suboptimal.
Nonetheless, I actually do also think there's something sort of vital here that doesn't come across in the more, you know, in the more orchestrated format of sitting alone, talking into a laptop.
So trade offs, right? There is a way in which this has a more living, breathing, you know, engaged quality because it's something happening in real life.
So it actually was quite fascinating just to hear a recording of me doing a presentation. I don't think I ever really had before.
And I do notice differences in how I present, you know, that are good as well as as well as suboptimal.
So this is a presentation that I just called survival ecology and something I've been meaning to do for quite a while.
And it goes all the way back to I forget which episode it was, but very early on in this podcast, I made an episode called A Model Political Program for Ecological Survival,
talking about taking existing environmental policy documents and then using them as an informational foundation to create proposals for very different ways of life.
And so this is me implementing that paradigm. And I will, I did an event the night before this event as well.
And so I'm going to be circling back here hopefully quite soon and making a podcast that is talking about the two events in a kind of broad theoretical strategic framework,
utilizing a bunch of stuff from the book, which really, really and truly will be available early next year.
But utilizing a bunch of stuff from the book that I haven't really gotten into pretty much at all in this podcast.
So look out for that fairly soon. And here is this.
I want to point out a weird place of convergence between institutional politics, you know, mainstream discussions of the ecological crisis and radical or oppositional or however you want to frame it discussions of it,
which is that none of them really contain a concrete like just like a truly tangible set of measures for shutting down everything superfluous that we are doing that is currently doing such grievous harm to the world.
But like figuring out how to keep everybody alive at the same time and maybe even like warm and dry.
And as somebody who for better or for worse has just read so much climate policy and forest policy and stuff over the years.
This has been this like weird source of angst. I really like I really started doing this research and like being kind of a difficult person to be around sometimes because I was like why isn't this happening like so long ago.
But it's interesting because even though I felt like I could see like some semblance of a set of prescriptions that should at least be articulated.
And that's the thing is that like what's weird about it is that, you know, like all this could be kind of wrong or like I could be like getting some things horribly wrong.
But it is an instance of just concretely and clearheadedly examining the current industrial economy and asking that set of questions and being like real specific about it.
And you know, so it's it's strange that even though I felt like I could see a path, it took me this long.
It took me over a decade to get to this point where I am now standing in front of an easel pad with y'all and just like taking a crack at it.
So in a way, like you know, this is both I think some of this is cool and real and world tree is among other things like a set of people who have converged around the podcast that I make who many of whom are scientists or science minded.
And so I'm also indebted to to them for for help with this.
But you know, it's like in a way this is really like an act of spiritual warfare against the freeze response that so many people seem to be experiencing or just like the weird whatever it is the inability to articulate concrete measures for survival.
And one of the I think that one of the things that inhibits us from doing this is that it's there's often whether it's explicitly stated or not a kind of like set of assumptions being made about the social unit at which decisions are being made.
So obviously in the institutional, you know, mainstream, let's say framework, there's an assumption that we're all just going to be in the structure that we're in right now, right?
We're going to live in states in in what I like to call like one giant circle, right?
The mass society model we're going to, we're just all going to like be in what we're in right now and decision makers are going to make decisions.
And that doesn't work out because the state isn't there to solve problems like that.
The state is a machine for extraction.
And but then what ends up happening if you're skeptical to outright hostile to that social unit often just feels sort of like there's a tendency to talk about disaggregation into smaller and smaller social units.
So I often counterposed the one giant circle model to the run to the hills model, right?
It's more about like kind of just like escaping and figuring out stuff like in small, you know, small bands surviving in the wasteland kind of stuff.
And one of the, so I think that the right way to sort of like navigate all the insane and it is insane like complexity of the situation is what I call a circles within circles model, which is characterized by the ability to cooperate without the obligation to like cooperation and escape basically.
Like so in other words, where you are just taking initiative with whoever is around that you have sufficient affinity with and proximity to to take initiative with.
But you are also orienting to the possibility of your, your little circle of affinity collaborating with many other circles of affinity and doing something that does feel kind of like a mass cooperate, you know, like the kinds of things that mass societies and social complexity enables without the
alcohol part where you're like dependent on any particular set of relationships are completely stuck in some specific circumstance and there's like resources you're dependent on that somebody can monopolize and, you know, all that stuff.
But at times as I talk about this, it might kind of sound like just in order to like articulate the dynamics of the situation like we'll go through many different possibilities that sort of imply different scales of social coordination and cooperation.
And sometimes you may be like, wait, wait, wait a second. Like, is this dude talking about like taking over like the city government like lobbying or something. And the answer is kind of like, yes, I potentially but also not intrinsically or necessarily.
So there'll be times where I'll just kind of talk about different stuff that could happen. And I'll be kind of agnostic on this but I want to like, always, always keep in mind that, ultimately, I think that we need to figure out initiatives that small groups of people like this loose collective
world tree that I work with can just start doing some just any make any tangible progress on. Okay, so the first the first sort of like intuition that I think so many of us have when we think about survival outside of the current
time is, you know, I mean, food is the one true human necessity and water. And you know, so there's often often where people's intuition goes quite quickly is to a localized food system.
Mine does, but I also think that I think that does make sense but there's also sort of important qualifications to make there but I think it's the right place to start.
So I did some digging in the scientific literature, trying to figure out sort of like minimal areas of food production to, you know, sustain, you know, for per capita survival.
And I was actually quite surprised I it was smaller than I thought we are making assumptions here about diet and about the kind of like soil and you know the climate we have.
So living here on the west side of the Cascades we have, you know, great productive capacity. And the diet that these numbers are valid for and you start going up from there is a diet that is vegan except for eggs, you know,
because chickens can eat scraps and forage on the margins of food production, whatever. But yeah, I was quite shocked. I'm getting this value from one paper but I checked a handful of others and I didn't really find anything contradictory.
So they estimate that the minimum viable area for producing food for one person for one year is point one three hectares or 1300 square meters.
You know, and if you're not super like a meter in a yard aren't that different. So, you know, think of a football field and the proportion of it that that is.
And so, you know, so then we can start like then we can start asking these interesting questions like okay obviously you can't you can't produce all the food that everybody in Portland needs in Portland right.
But how much of it could you produce and the rest of the rough estimate I made Portland is 37,500 hectares has a population of 635,000 people. So that's point zero six hectares per person, but that's like, you know, that's counting here.
That's counting like the Brooklyn train yard.
So asking these two questions like what if we tore up all the damn pavement or like what if we left a couple you know like what if we left some like transportation corridors that are already like major streets but we tore up all the other pavement.
And what one of the most shocking things I found was that not just like not just even streets but parking lots in some cities cities really do vary in this regard like but some cities are like 25% parking.
It's just so crazy.
But in all in all US cities, I had to kind of like some I had to make an estimate from analysis of different you know be like a paper that looked at four different cities and then a different paper that looked at a handful but basically the paved area that you really could just tear up for food production.
In any American city is always considerably more than 25% of the total land area and it is up to 50% in some of them.
And then the other thing that I think about a lot is rooftops you know and that's more logistically it would just be kind of fun and easy to like tear up a parking lot and plant underneath it.
There's obviously more logistics into like cultivating on rooftops but there you know people do it.
And so that's another like 19 to 25% of the area the total area of a given city Portland included.
So really like cautiously estimating like with a considerable margin of error in our favor.
I think that Portland has a sufficient land area to produce about 25% of the calories that we need to survive.
Which I just think is really interesting to know it's like a cool place to start.
Now we're going to see how bad I fumble.
Oh no that's so easy.
You know so then the question is like okay but so like what is the area of the circle around Portland that we should draw to get that other 75%
Which I actually do think is a better question to ask than like should people diffuse out of the city because then they would need somewhere to live.
I think it's actually a lot more ecologically sane to talk about bringing food into here from outside than it is to talk about people.
You know I often think about how like literally deer went extinct in Kentucky during the Great Depression.
Like you know people who are like hungry and just looking around for any way to survive would probably have like a pretty terrible impact.
But it's funny it's like my initial intention with with asking that question was because I love me.
I love stuff where it's like you make really like formal institutional looking infographics and stuff.
This is very much something I got from the earth first movement in the 90s.
It's like you make your own kind of like respectable seeming policy things and then you know and then you get somebody in power to be like that's ridiculous.
That could never happen but the fact they're saying it can't happen makes it kind of seem like maybe it could like you know more viable than than it did before essentially the whole overton window thing right.
You know so I really wanted to come up with some like some maps you know I wanted to like use GIS and be like here's where all this is coming from.
And like be very quantitative about it and everything that the sort of like gleeful yeah you know whatever like I just I love that vibe but.
I read some papers about like the you know like the food system localization potential for different kinds of American cities in different ecosystems.
And in some cases it's like difficult to impossible like you know what's the what's the local food system for like Phoenix Arizona look like I don't know.
And the authors of the papers I read didn't really seem to know either.
But really what came up in Portland was that it just started to feel like there wasn't enough of a problem there like some problems really are too trivial to solve.
You know it's like it's like OK should this area like you know how much of it should go to Portland how much to this other population center in the other direction.
And the answer quickly became like I don't know like people would just really need to figure that out in situ you know like like on the ground.
But it is like not it is not a huge dilemma or there's there's just really not much of a problem to solve there.
We really could like localize the food system in this major major way with a ton of room to spare.
I mean you know ultimately America is a net exporter of food but we're this like massively biologically productive region.
And so a good way to talk about this is Oregon's total energy use being converted into CO2 emissions.
So I'm not talking about the hydropower and stuff that we use here necessarily but because that all produces electricity which doesn't go into transporting food except for like a tiny handful of electric vehicles
in some food distribution fleets we're actually we're actually overestimating the amount of Oregon's total energy use that goes to producing food.
But it turns out that it's a it's point nine million metric tons is you know the common measure for CO2 turns out it's point nine million metric tons or less than one percent.
Point seven five percent of our total energy use goes to actually transporting food and that is under like I mean that that's like somebody poisons Uruguay to grow some soybeans
and then they go to China and get made into tofu with green onions and then it comes back to North America and then I buy it at new seasons like that.
That that is like using the most insane destructive wasteful system imaginable.
It's still less than one percent of the energy that we're using.
So you know I don't know like I'm just going to throw some numbers around here because but if we were to sort of act like adults if we were to like stop doing that.
But you know to keep just like a truly minimum transportation system alive sufficient to keep us alive.
I don't know like point two million metric tons point one.
And so using using the first of those numbers just to like I don't know like that that's not like that would not be like you're just eating stuff from like Newburgh or whatever.
And I'd be like avocados from California and apples from Yakima.
I'm guessing we could do that at like point zero eight percent of our current energy use like you know considerably less than one percent like a different order of magnitude.
So I think that's like a that's like a knowing that for me helped kind of like like I said a lot of this stuff gets so fuzzy because it's just also complex.
And you know I find like clarifying some of those variables started to make me feel more able to think concretely about real projects of survival.
And then I will I will argue that food really is the only truly you know it's the only actual like human necessity.
Well you know in water but like I think there is this very reasonable and interesting question to ask of like what proportion of everything else we're doing.
Would vastly improve people's lives and I guess like the the phrasing I'll use is is maximize human potential.
You know like make us best able to fully fully articulate the human genius or whatever.
And so I do want to look at the rest of the economy and just kind of see like what's there.
What could we maybe get rid of. And I will say you know having read so much climate and environmental policy that just is like this infinite labyrinth.
Something very psychological going on there.
A whole lot of like setting some targets and then writing giant documents and then being like but we're going to kick all the specific ways that we're going to achieve this to a subcommittee.
And then the subcommittee like meets for a year or two and literally makes a number of sub subcommittees that are supposed to like actually figure out the concrete ways that they're going to implement the very abstract things that the subcommittee made in.
Like that that really has been Oregon climate policy since I can't even remember anymore I think it was like in 2003 there was a mandate to radically reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
It has just never been met but there's like all this just fucking labyrinth of policy documents and different commissions and planning committees and stuff that are just producing this endless tangle of stuff.
And so there's something quite bleep like something sort of like joyful in this for me having like endured reading all that stuff for so long and just being like OK here's what we can get rid of.
All right we'll just stop. You know you just don't need to do that anymore. So so what about everything else other than food.
And I am quite aware I'm not going to win any design awards here with this pie chart. I mean like none of these proportions are actually you know represented spatially in this but.
But so exports are represented another 24 million metric tons of emissions slash energy use the total the total Oregon economy in Oregon does this really cool thing that makes this actually like so much more functional to talk about where.
And I think we might still be the only state that has this analysis. They don't just talk about emissions and energy use that happen here. They talk about emissions and energy use that happen in like China or Brazil or wherever that are to meet consumption that happens here.
So this is based on like a consumption based inventory of greenhouse gas emissions and energy use. So our total consumption based emissions and energy use is 120 million metric tons.
24 million of that is exports. And since we were like talking about localizing the food system and just keeping a few really specific things that we could truly use.
You know I'm just going to assume if there's if there's something in some hypothetical future economy slash human ecology that makes sense for us to be sending elsewhere.
It's a truly truly such a trivial proportion of it that I'm just not going to bother to count it for now.
So we can just not do that. We don't need the Nike factory. We don't need the Intel factory. We don't need to send herbal tea to grocery stores in Boulder, Colorado or whatever.
And then they're looking looking at the different other economic sectors that that the the analysts did in this consumption based inventory.
There were a whole categories whole sectors that were just like sort of obviously things that we could just not do.
I'm not going to go through all of them in but but I'll give you a few examples. It's it's like there there's a category that was just called services.
But the services are things like real estate banking and car rentals right. So that's a that's a 9.6 million metric ton cost right and comparing that to like the food transport thing.
It's it's like a whole whole lot more could maybe just stop doing that.
There's like a heavy industry category that's everything from manufacturing missiles to heavy equipment and stuff 7.6 million metric tons fucking goodbye construction considering the the large surplus of actual housing compared to the population.
I'd say goodbye to that 7.3 million metric tons retail, which they count separately from like, you know, the way they break this stuff down.
There's always going to be all these discretionary acts in there, but so that's like separate from like grocery stores and stuff like that.
Another 4.1 million metric tons. I mean that that's like literally energy used for like keeping display windows lit so that people can see the craft stationary in them at three in the morning when they walk past the shop and stuff like that.
So cumulatively that that 24 million metric tons and exports and the what I what I'm describing as truly useless economic activity.
Comprise 60.7% of the overall economy leaving us with 39.3% of current emissions and energy use where I would just say it's like the way that they analyze this makes it kind of entangled you see these categories where you're like well obviously we don't need to do the vast majority of this.
But there might be something in here worth preserving if we could again articulating that you know food and water or what humans absolutely need like like you know in acknowledging like that not everybody would make it in a paradigm like that but that some of us would.
So okay so again I didn't I didn't break down everything in this presentation there's some other stuff that I did some estimates of and made some assumptions about but I'll give you a few examples some big picture items.
They have a vehicles in parts category that is the manufacturer vehicles but also you know the emissions from burning fossil fuels to drive them all over the damn place 16.4 million metric tons.
I think that they're and I will talk about because I don't think we should use any fossil fuels at all but I'll talk about how I think a truly tiny proportion of this could be sustained you know the for a variety of reasons again this idea of maximizing human potential
like let's say we're relying on systems where it's useful to have somebody with certain kinds of technical knowledge come and do something.
Let's say that at a certain point it would in fact be really nice to be able to read something that somebody wrote outside of walking distance or you know whatever like send somebody a letter or something.
So I was just like I don't know this is like obviously I'm just spitballing here but I was like yeah out of that 16.4 let's hang on to like point to for stuff that just really could make life so much better.
Okay.
And I kind of did that with a few of these where I was just like I'm just going to throw out a number and I don't really know you know what the number would imply in terms of the functioning of the system.
But I do think there's an argument to be made here for hanging on to some of this.
So health care is another one it's a it's a 5.4 million metric ton energy consuming sector of the economy.
I would not be alive were it not for very complex and intensive medical interventions that were kind of inarticulably hellish to endure.
And I don't I mean as much as I think that I'm cool and I do good stuff like I don't really think there's a justification for a medical system that intensive.
But you know like stuff like making you know anybody who's who would have died without some antibiotics or something can imagine hanging on to enough of that to keep otherwise healthy people who don't say need to go on dialysis for years.
Alive right.
And so again I was like let's take that from 5.4 million metric tons to point to I did this again with this category called furnishings and supplies which is just like kind of anything you would find in a house from like a couch to a lamp to a bookcase to whatever.
And I you know it was like I was literally sitting at my desk when I was doing this and like looking at the stuff on my desk and it's like a sound system and a microscope and a globe and those aren't human necessities but out of an abundance of caution or whatever.
Or because maybe in this post collapse utopia that we're tending you know we're like trying to go towards it would be sick to be able to service sound system so that we could still have dance parties forever right like you know something like that right.
So again it took it from 3.2 mmt to point to clothing you know I was like sure that's something that people seem to like having more than not having we don't need to do it the way that we're doing it that's for sure.
And there is so much of it around that I think it would be quite reasonable to say like let's just put a complete moratorium on that for the time being but I don't know.
Again like you know trying to trying to have the margin of error be in favor of in our favor of saying that we left more rather than not enough.
I took that from one mmt to point one that really probably is too much.
And then here these last two categories where were where I was really like OK these are like real questions that you know like I've lived in spaces that weren't heated in the winter in it's it's hard you know it's like it's not a true human necessity
but if we're talking about maximizing human potential and not spending like 90% of your time in your in your bed because it's the only place you're warm enough might be good.
So you know lighting is like a kind of big one but again like proportional it's like it's like one of those things I mean people are literally like yeah when the lights go out or whatever.
But but again it's like less than than one percent or it's like just right about one percent of the energy use that our current economy demands.
So I took it from one point three to like point three again like the lights illuminating the you know the craft stationary in the display window maybe not so much but like maybe maybe a little tiny bit.
But then we get into a category they just call appliances and so the two big consumers there are cooking and refrigeration and heating and cooling.
I decided to have the cooking and refrigeration category.
So you know maybe a little less like turning on a stove from the 70s that's insanely energy inefficient to like heat something up for a little snack in the middle of the night or whatever but like you could still cook in your house.
And then heating and cooling I took from seven point eight to three and that so that's and that's the last of the sort of like things that I thought were worse worth preserving.
But so that leaves us with by far the largest energy use category in this in these sectors of the economy where it felt like legitimate human need and useless economic activity.
We're like kind of mixed up with one another and a bunch of that is like you know it's heating and cooling like banks and office buildings and stuff that we could just kind of gleefully imagine no longer needing to heat.
But also in terms of you know residences and stuff.
I'm sure many of you are very aware that the way that we've constructed housing in the industrial age is like I mean this is the worst possible thing of like building huge spaces with really fairly thin walls like that.
And you want to do the other thing right you want thick walls with relatively small space.
And so some of the like some of the sort of like concrete work that World Tree has been engaged in is like just trying to figure out if say it's like the long shot thing of suddenly a lot of the industrial economy is shutting down.
Because we want to stop destroying the world or say it's the other thing where a lot of it is shutting down because it's just gotten unstable because it because it just is.
You know like if we wanted to like retrofit buildings with no concern for what better homes and gardens would have to say about the way that they looked and just like no like if we were just like what is around that we can use to insulate.
You know if you've ever if you ever like made like an emergency shelter like a debris hut or something like that.
You know that you really can just kind of like make a structure warmer and warmer by just adding more insulating material of any kind to it especially if the space inside is small.
And you know so like we've been like looking at the waste stream and stuff like that especially in the Amazon era there is just truly depressing quantities of like bubble wrap and stuff like that it's actually really good insulation.
And you know and then there's like there's more sort of like respectable instances of this the Kailash Eco Village right by where I live has retrofitted a bunch of buildings to be like true passive house standard buildings like they really don't require a bunch of heating and cooling.
And they were just like shitty old departments and houses before they did that and but they look like you know regular structures so that's cool if you want to.
You know but I think I would rather live in some like amorphous blob of bubble wrap and cardboard personally.
And you know like there really is something to be said for as as the climate intensifies it's like the sort of like instinct to be like like let's go underground or whatever you know and if you start you can you can you can retrofit with additional insulation.
Both out or in doing it in makes the space smaller so that's you know a more efficient use of your time build in another wall if you want you know just put it in the in the frame.
But so there's like a decent case to be made for I don't know like us just actually being able to do this on a fairly short timeline I guess is really just like what I'm trying to say.
And so I'll just go ahead and say like the the obviously this is just like a rough like you know I mean I've made some of these numbers up but they all do have a thought process underlying them.
Oh wait no no I did want to say this I knew I was forgetting something.
So but if you build out if you if you insulate or retrofit out at a certain point you're just going to come to like the next building right and I actually think there's a great argument to be made for doing that for kind of making a matrix of let's say a sort of
connective tissue or whatever of whatever's around in you know whatever you're insulating with and to kind of like create you know you would have to create doorways in the roof and stuff like that.
But that's you know that's like a way people have lived in a variety of landscapes and then you could cover that you know you could you could also be cultivating food or whatever on this surface.
And you would have more because you wouldn't have the disjuncture between the roof in the ground you would have more continuous surface area and less shaded areas to work with so you would actually get more food production potential out of it.
So yeah I really love to imagine this whole world of like us all kind of like connecting buildings and like kind of going into the earth and then you know having like this verdant food forest thing on top.
I like to think about that. There's also I will just briefly mention there's a lot of really interesting work happening right now where people are managed you know people are using like fungus and bacteria and stuff like that as building materials because you can put them in a mold
or just kind of give them something to grow on and some of them produce very like durable you know like some of them produce solios which is also what wood is so this sort of like connective matrix could start out with stuff from discarded Amazon packages but you may be able at some point to like make it this living thing which I think would be fun.
Okay so yeah so doing this kind of hasty you know let's say back of the napkin style well but like back of the napkin with a fair amount of thought put into it.
But this style of calculation what I ended up with is everything I was saying maybe we should at least consider hanging onto this was a 5.6 million metric tons of what is currently CO2 emissions but you know let's say energy use.
Or 4.7% of the current industrial economy that's what I think an argument could be made for looking around not it's not I'm not saying it has to continue I'm saying I think it's worth looking around to see if there is some way that we could generate that energy.
And that it would make life so much better in so many ways if we could.
So you know so like how on earth or whatever but if we are talking about like a really rapid you know like a moment where things were being hastily reconfigured or whatever the current Portland energy mix is 43% coal 24% gas.
6% wind and a lot of the wind power does come from very far away travels along high power transmission lines from like Wyoming or wherever biomass is 1% some ambiguous other thing is another 1%.
But then the dams that are already operating and have been operating for generations now produce 25% of the current energy consumption and I would love to see those fucking things come down.
But I do think there's an argument to be made if it's already operating for having a brief you know I don't know five year transition period where we're getting I mean 25% is obviously considerably more than 4.7%.
It's about five times more where we're getting like that much energy from this system that has already been operating for a long time.
I don't want to see it happen forever though I'm emphatic on that.
So there's this question of like so what is like you know so why keep it alive at all like is there is there like something to be aiming for.
And this is where I do I think that I can't estimate and I don't want to pretend like I can how much of this 4% like whether it's more whether it's less obviously would depend on the scale and the intensity of the endeavor.
But because everything in the current paradigm has to be as tragically fucking stupid and pointless and cartoonishly evil as possible.
Discussions about biofuels have all been like oh yeah well let's just like let's just like take agricultural land and grow corn on it and turn it into ethanol or whatever.
And that's a terrible terrible idea for a number of reasons you know because the current agricultural paradigm is so destructive to the carbon sequestering potential of soils.
It's actually not carbon neutral and it puts food and fuel in competition with one another.
But it really is such a crazy thing about reading papers you know that have interesting possibilities is you consistently see that the most interesting paths we could go down are always the ones that people with money and power have just neglected to pay any attention to.
There is a lot of interesting science around converting algae into biofuel and the reason for algae specifically is because it is the organism or various algal species are capable of producing more biomass than any other species.
Some of them double in biomass every day.
I mean like think about watching a tree get twice as big every day or a corn plant or whatever.
And so the way that that's cultivated light only penetrates water to a depth of about half a meter sufficient for algae to grow.
So there's different systems for like cultivating algae in you know obviously ponds but also on rooftops and stuff like that right.
So we talk about rooftop solar now and that's like yeah like enslaved some children to go mine some lithium somewhere and then we'll make some solar panels and whatever.
But you really could cultivate in just like flat using plastic that we probably could just find laying around in the waste stream.
You could cultivate algae on rooftops on the sides of buildings.
There's very cool conceptual designs where it's like people are talking about like living you know like like turning whole high rises into crazy algae farms and stuff like that.
And so this is something that well so I'll say the I like talking about specific pieces of infrastructure and thinking about how we might want to use them for at least less terrible ends.
You know be a little less cartoonishly evil and one of my great Moby Dicks in this life is the Northwest Portland critical energy infrastructure hub.
That's that that thing you see if you're like going up Highway 30 Northwest Portland on both sides but particularly the west side of the Willamette River.
And it has all those tank farms. You know there's all those different there's a crude oil trans loading facility some industrial lubricants a bunch of jet fuel or whatever.
But to me I think it would be like I love to think about converting that to some kind of system for the production of algae biofuel both because the storage tanks are a good place to you know store liquid fuels.
But also because the fact that there are these huge vertical structures with these big roofs mean that you have way more surface area than just like the land that you're on where you could potentially you know cultivate algae on the outside of those things.
Obviously that does sort of imply a you know it's centralized infrastructure. So it comes with all the problems all the all the sort of like threats to human autonomy that come when there's like something that everybody relies on.
And if people manage to control it with violence then you're kind of subordinate to them.
So I don't like to think about that being the only option right it's the whole circles within circles thing.
There would have to be local production and power generation stuff happening as well I think but I think it's it is fun again like if if we could achieve a sufficient let's say.
Threat to the state's monopoly on violence and whatever else it would take to like grab hold of that motherfucker. It would be very interesting to like.
Again I just like you know years of planning direct actions of that place and stuff I've snuck around in it so much and I would I just have this deep desire to to like see it transformed into something that sustains rather than threatens life.
So if we if we were doing stuff you know if we were creating an agile biofuel system up at the Northwest energy hub there's like there are ways there's existing infrastructure there that we could use to generate power like there's.
Methane aka natural gas like combine that Northwest natural operates.
You can it's pretty trivial to convert algal species to to feed algal species to bacteria that produce methane you could make gas that way it is truly carbon neutral if if you're not destroying soil or cutting down forests to make fuel.
Then the biomass actually really really really does compensate for the fact that you are then burning the biomass like if you're if you're just constantly flexing it through the system and there's no other dynamics involved.
There are so many claims of carbon neutrality that are fake but that one's real it really is of I feel pretty confident in that assessment of read a lot about it.
So you know there's there's ways that we could generate power right there and that would be pretty fascinating I think but.
You know if we wanted to have these more localized systems.
What what is it that we're like if it's not if it's not electricity coming over transmission lines or whatever what is it we're doing and you know you can make ethanol from from algae so you could like power existing generators and motors and you know like automobile motors and stuff like that.
So one of the things that World Tree.
That I'm very proud of like having figured out by bringing a group of people together with some strange and interesting backgrounds and talents that I think is like just on an aesthetic level I think nothing says surviving the apocalypse better than this.
A friend in Toronto this crazy hacker came up with this idea of having you know like producing ethanol and then cannibalizing a bunch of vehicles for their alternators and she figured out a way to like put them all into like a serial configuration.
So rather than just having one alternator connected to a vehicle engine giving you enough electricity for like your stereo and your GPS or whatever it's like you're actually converting all of the fuel you're burning to electricity.
I just again aesthetically I just really like that there are a bunch of that's that's probably like a more sort of Herculean endeavor that there's actually a lot of ways like basically you need a fuel to burn.
And the simplest thing you do with it is boil water generate steam and figure out some way to turn a turbine.
That's how all the you know I mean that's how coal fired power works.
That's how nuclear power works Einstein somewhat famously quipped nuclear power is one hell of a way to boil water.
I think this makes a lot more sense.
So yeah yeah that's that's like kind of the energy component of it.
This next part might feel a little icky or whatever.
We'll just see this is the this is my last my last I want to say slide but you know what I mean but I want to talk about you know because there's such I think we all have such a sense that you know what is it.
There's like a three to five day supply of food and grocery stores.
And so obviously like people can hoard food.
But if we're talking about like trying to not just descend into chaos if that system is interrupted then there's this very interesting question to ask about like can some kind of functional food reserve be created to allow us to
go into a moment of really significant shock and actually be able to like have a soberly deliberative you know to like think about what to do next.
And so again this might feel a little icky.
I'll talk about the way that food so with so much of this stuff it's like you don't have to like you don't have to like go to utopia to find answers to some of these questions like would it be possible to create a food reserve that had enough in it for every person for a year or something like that so that we could.
It's like you just have to go somewhere a little less stupid and a little less driven insane by weird ideology than here like like Finland you know or even like fucking China they both operate food reserves where they have enough calories just hanging out for everybody for a year.
The thing that and then the US kind of actually used to but it violated some free market principle or another or whatever.
But but it's actually quite interesting to look at how these things actually work because you don't want to just like accumulate a bunch of grain and then hang on to it forever because it'll degrade right.
And so how food reserves actually work is that they buy in times of surplus and then gradually like once they've accumulated what they need they sell off little or you know like with a little margin they sell off the little margin in times of relative scarcity.
And these words do not come out of my mouth easily but the the effect is that it simultaneously stabilizes markets and makes the money.
We did it we got through it that was the hard part that was the thing I didn't want to say you know so so like I kind of made this graph of like without reserves we have this like bumpier ride.
And then with reserves it's just like it's just like a smoother curve.
I have this sort of like I'm not I am not going to describe this in any detail here tonight with y'all but I have this whole kind of like vast conspiracy in my head about how you could maybe create a giant network of food reserves without anybody really
knowing by getting a group of investors to do something they didn't totally understand I'll just put it like that.
But there's also like there's like some other kind of fun you know it's like I have there's a world tree collaborator in West Virginia who just like made a new department of her city government granting she lives in a small city.
But I mean they just wrote up a proposal and took it to their city council and they were like sure but you don't get any money.
But then the fact that they were part of the city government opened up the door to all these funding sources that they otherwise wouldn't have had any chance of accessing.
And so you know Portland right now basically has like a sort of like emergency planning entity that is like earthquakes or whatever.
And then you know they got their like they got their like sustainability bureaus and all that stuff.
And that's mostly useless infographics.
But but I think it would actually be quite fascinating to just see what it would be like to propose that Portland try to create a municipal bureau that was there for like a sustained crisis in the global economy.
And again it's hard to say but with stuff like this it's like you would be proposing something that is not only like how they would be acting if they were acting like adults but it would also generate revenue for the city.
And yeah I have like I had in my head a bunch of other stuff to say about that but this is always where the level of conspiracy.
And I'm just like sometimes you've got to just get straight up Machiavellian.
And I don't know I'm feeling kind of self conscious about how much thought I've put into the particular forms of elaborate deception that might be necessary to pull some of this off.
But yeah and then I also just because different kinds of things appeal to different kinds of people.
And this is something that also really appeals to me having grown up in a part of Northern California where everybody was growing things clandestinely.
You know and often on like federal land or private industrial forest land I'm also just truly fascinated by the prospect of doing like dispersed cultivation in scarred and traumatized industrial forests
and have been experimenting a little bit with that.
It kind of plays into my sense of also wanting to like create some structures outside of the city that I could maybe go and hide in if I felt like that was a good idea.
So I'll end by just talking about like you know like that as like basically like going back to this first thing I was saying about the nature of the social units that we're talking about
when we talk about concrete measures of survival.
Like I'm really into doing stuff like that because it's just something that we can go do.
But I'm also really into talking about these sort of like much more ambitious and broader projects that would involve a bunch of people.
And I think that everything that we do in response to the times we're living in we should really think about as something that can be durable across a wide range of different scenarios
like being useful to us in a whole bunch of different situations.
And so I feel like taking like parallel efforts like that is a good way to you know kind of achieve that.
And I will also just say that in my experience the thing that you aim for in turn your political or social project very frequently falls.
I think of it in terms of degrees even though I don't know you know how to quantify that but they often fall what feel like a few degrees short of where you were trying to get.
Like I quip that trying to overthrow the government didn't really work out super well for me but I did manage to shut down a bunch of industrial infrastructure.
Extinction Rebellion started out with a mandate to shut down a bunch of industrial infrastructure and ended up doing at least in America ended up doing like a lot of rallies right.
You know and so it's like you got to aim for somewhere way the fuck past where you kind of like need to be to survive.
And you know so it's like whatever right like aim for I don't know aim for like a global council of all species deliberating together over the direction of evolution.
And maybe you'll get something kind of pedestrian in comparison like global revolution or whatever but the with respect to like this kind of stuff.
Like having these kinds of projects that have sort of like big picture aims that are at least tentative possibilities where you're doing something practical but you are orienting towards mass cooperation or like achieving some grand transformation.
Like whether or not you whether or not you get the circles within circles thing on talking about it does end up being a really good way to actually achieve the run to the hills thing and like to actually get enough people and resources and planning together so that you won't be the ones who die or whatever.
And so that is my survival ecology presentation and like I said this is like it's World Tree is this very diffuse thing.
There's no I would say there's essentially no administration and people just kind of talk and do things as they feel inclined in whatever little clusters of affinity that they do them in but all of these projects I'm describing are something that I'm trying to advance in some way.
So if you feel like any of this speaks to you and you maybe want to like try to drive some of it forward with me or some other people I've been working with.
You know you can talk to me tonight or get in touch with me again my podcast is called fight like an animal and I would direct you to my contact information or you could sign up.
At oh right I'll put I'll put a sign I didn't actually do that yet I'll put a sign up sheet over either by the food or by the literature table.
But I'm trying to do a good job of like actually making a mailing list and identifying who on it wants to participate in what and not sending people emails they don't want but yeah.
Yeah so if you want to if you want to think about or talk about or pursue any of these projects there are ways to do that to be in touch and that's that and I think I want to take maybe like five minutes before we go into the next.
Thank you.
The demonstrations and radical politics we notice the connection between danger and the feeling of being alive.
I understood that immediately.
The feeling of being alive.