Title: Philosophy or Schizophrenia
Episode #: 44
Episode ID: 10140522
Source: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/10140522-philosophy-or-schizophrenia.mp3
------------------------------------------------------------

=== EPISODE METADATA ===
Generated: 2026-01-12 01:02:06
Episode ID: 17708202
MP3 File: 17708202-a-body-with-many-selves.mp3
Title: A Body with Many Selves
Podcast/Artist: World Tree Center for Evolutionary Politics
Album/Series: Fight Like An Animal
Source URL: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/17708202-a-body-with-many-selves.mp3
========================
We have to quit viewing man as a single psychological entity that in fact his psychological self is a multiple self.
That he has a variety of mental systems existing in his brain.
They have emotions, they have memories, they have incentives, they have destinies,
and they're able to control the motor apparatus by which I mean they're able to make movements,
they're able to actually precipitate behaviors on the part of someone.
And once those actions are completed, here comes his verbal system in to give an explanation
and to propose a theory to itself to explain why these actions were carried out.
Greetings friends, I'm Arnold Schroeder and this is Fight Like an Animal.
Find episode bibliographies and other texts at AgainstTheInternet.com
If you'd like to support this work materially, please check out patreon.com slash biological singularity.
If you'd like access to the World Tree Discord server, please write to me and tell me a little bit about yourself.
And I am currently going through a significant backlog of emails and actually responding to them.
Unfinished correspondence which has haunted both my dreams and my waking shall haunt me no more.
So write to me for any other reason at all if you feel so inclined. Let's do this.
I'm organizing an event in Portland, Oregon sometime roughly centered around the autumn equinox.
Let's say for the sake of argument somewhere in between September 19th and the 23rd or so.
If you are interested in participating, write to me and when I have a more solid set of promotional materials,
I will send them your way.
If you've already indicated interest in Portland area events, I'm aware and will be sending you something.
But the broad outlines so far as I can discern them at this point are that I will be presenting a lecture
that I'm just calling a survival ecology for Portland, Oregon.
Previewing some approaches to an energy system and a food system
that could conceivably scale up to constitute municipal policy or something like that,
but could also be pursued by individuals or small groups, something we don't have to wait to try to do.
Then I believe that we are going to do a participatory workshop which I am calling Stashes and Escape Roots
and we'll be sort of imagining the moment that you get a text saying that there's some people at your house
that you'd really rather not see and you're not carrying anything with you,
but it suddenly feels like it's time to leave town.
So imagining a sort of hidden infrastructure of places to be and things to access
that can be hidden away and can also function as kind of implicit meeting spots
for people who share knowledge of these sites and can allow us some fluidity,
give us a few options and how we navigate the ever-escalating landscape of repression regardless of who's in office.
And then there will be some kind of ceremony, I think that there will be a tree planting ceremony
and perhaps a considerably more elaborate affair of that nature
and we will also, we'll rage, we'll build a fire.
It's going to be in this very beautiful spot under some glorious cotton woods on the Willamette River, sandy beaches
and we'll do something rock and we'll go long into the night.
Maybe we'll still be there at sunrise, but probably starting in the evening,
probably starting when there's still light.
So yeah, if you're interested in that, please get in touch with me.
That will be on the Equinox and begins this cycle, or I guess it's probably fair to say at this point,
continues it, maybe started, who knows when it started,
but of trying to do at least eight events a year on the Solstice's Equinoxes and the points in between.
Okay, so we are going to continue discussions that we began in the last episode,
kind of also continuing in this format, although to a lesser extent,
I'm certainly far less sleep deprived and intoxicated than I was the last time I podcasted,
but in this sort of new approach that I'm adopting where I just feel kind of burdened by all the outlines that I have
and I'm kind of trying to move through some of this material in a way that is quicker than I've done in the past,
so I'm spending less time meticulously structuring outlines or looking up the one perfect quote to illustrate my point
and more just going through this massive compendium of research and citations that I already have.
So I'm going to be continuing to riff on the outline that I was working from in a world with many centers
but today I'm going to start by speaking in terms of this very strange world we inhabit
as partially a function of some dark correlations between attitudes and aptitudes,
between how people see the world and what they are good at doing.
Attitudes and aptitudes is about the best I can come up with for like a catchy, a punchy way of phrasing that.
After having spent years thinking about what would be a good punchy way to phrase it,
that's the best I got and I'm just going to call it there.
But so here's like a few fun facts about the world that we will try to explain, examine the significance of
and make some inferences of in this episode as well as tying it back into a whole bunch of themes from last episode.
Let's see, by far the most common professional backgrounds for elected officials in the United States Congress,
House of Representatives and the Senate is either law or business.
In contrast, there has not been a physical scientist in the United States Senate since 1987.
So that means that every time that climate and earth system scientists present their terrifying results to Congress,
they are presenting their highly technical, fabulously complicated mathematical models of the global crisis
that we're into lawyers and business majors who kind of can't do math, you know.
Let's see what else.
Engineers are 17 times more likely to participate in authoritarian political violence than would be expected by their presence in the population at large.
Conversely, humanities and social sciences graduates are vastly more likely to participate in egalitarian forms of political violence
than would be expected from their overall presence in the population.
Scientists and mathematicians participate in political violence at a rate that would be expected by their presence in the overall population.
A while ago, I wrote and published a scientific paper.
I'm honestly not sure if I have ever mentioned that on this podcast, but in, I think 2023,
I published in a kind of like experimental scientific journal, but it is searchable.
It has a DOI and is searchable in scientific literature databases.
But a journal called Seeds of Science, I selected it because its logo is a tree, you know.
And the title of the paper was scientific theories and their psychological corollaries to ecological crisis as a case study in the need for synthesis.
And so this was me.
I think that I really tried to do too many things with this paper.
But this was me presenting some version of a thesis that I've also presented on this podcast that at a certain point, scientists need to stop presenting their terrifying results to people within institutions of power
and start having a meaningful scientific dialogue about why those institutions of power behave the way that they do
and a meaningful dialogue about power in which they acknowledge that the dialogue isn't going anywhere.
And if they want to try to save the world, they're going to have to attempt to intervene in a more direct fashion.
There's a variety of reasons why I think that people within scientific institutions are kind of uniquely placed to influence a certain subset of variables
that shape the world we're living in.
Obviously there's at least some technical aptitudes and abilities there that aren't present elsewhere.
But also in terms of appealing to, in terms of kind of storytelling and trying to pull off the interesting and complicatedly related to existing institutions of power
thing of asserting parallel institutions of governance and decision making,
I do feel like people within scientific institutions are uniquely positioned to appeal to those who feel like they really need a roomful of,
to feel like there's a roomful of adults somewhere making decisions to appeal to psychological needs for stability and security, basically.
And to some extent, even though it's really not so much my thing, to appeal to psychological needs for a sense of institutional authority,
even if they're not trying to exercise any coercive, any form of dominance, let's say.
You know, perhaps emulating some of the state's administrative functions, but not necessarily it's subordinating coercive functions.
And so, you know, it's me making the case for that.
And there is some subset of people within the Academy.
There have been a handful of interesting papers published from various, you know, conservation biologists, earth system scientists, climate scientists and whatnot,
kind of tending in that direction.
I'll put a few in the bibliography.
There's a couple of scientists who are calling for a new discipline called survival ecology, which is a scientific dialogue,
not just about the ecological crisis, but about what to do about it because clearly the existing models of how you influence that are wrong.
So, you know, there's like a handful of people out there who are doing something vaguely in that direction.
But I think that very quickly what would come up is that there's just core differences between people in how they perceive the world,
even if they happen to be in the same scientific discipline, and indeed even use the exact same research methods and basically have the same bibliographies in their heads,
have been exposed to the same information presented in the same ways.
And so that's kind of, that was a lot of, you know, it was almost like I kind of hastily got through.
I used the World Scientist's second warning to humanity, which I think was issued in 2017,
but followed up on the, I think it was 25 year anniversary of a first open letter to humanity.
That scientist wrote saying this is all going quite badly and we should do something else.
So, you know, I kind of like begin with this quip of, okay, well, what's the theory here that, you know,
if getting hundreds of signatories to the first letter wasn't adequate, getting a couple thousand to the second should do the job,
you know, if science is supposed to be responsive to empirical reality, at what point does it say this doesn't work?
So I try, you know, it's like I try to do that and even like set up some methodologies for identifying ecological thresholds
beyond which we should in fact say this definitely didn't work past tense.
But then that's kind of like this hasty, you know, then I get into this question of like, okay,
so what are these fundamental differences between people who inhabit these same scientific disciplines?
And what I'm arguing for is a research paradigm of just correlating variation in scientific schools of thought with core psychological traits
and referencing some existing psychometrics, but also kind of pointing to this landscape that overlaps with a lot of different ways
we think about individual differences, but it is a little bit of a different conceptualization and saying,
here are some of the major differences that I see like here are kind of some of the kinds of minds that I see in the academy
and how they are pretty robustly associated with to some extent with different disciplines,
and because disciplines so often fracture into different schools of thought,
here's the way these kinds of minds are associated with different schools of thought.
So I don't know whether I did a good job or not.
That paper exists and I doubt very much that the authors of this paper I'm about to talk about read my paper
and we're like, oh yeah, we should totally do that, but pettiness compels me to mention that I did publish it first
and a couple years later and a huge shout out to Daniel associated with the World Tree Project for bringing this to our attention,
but a couple years later this great paper came out called Why Do Scientists Disagree?
And they are making a very strikingly similar set of arguments to the ones I made in that paper.
So these authors assessed a number of controversial topics in psychology
and then asked a pretty large sample of researchers for their opinions on these controversial topics,
asked them to take some psychometrics, correlated the results of the two.
The strongest correlation was with a psychometric called Tolerance of Ambiguity,
which like it sounds, if you've been listening for a while, it's somewhat related to need for closure.
There are so many different psychological surveys that kind of get at some of the same things
and they always, any of these scales can conceivably divided into even more acutely targeted sub-scales,
but also they tend to overlap with other scales that are trying to get at different questions.
There's just really no clear place to definitively draw these lines.
One simply does the best they can, but to read a little from this paper, Why Do Scientists Disagree?
Our findings provide evidence for the idea that science represents an ecology of diverse perspectives
on contentious themes not straightforwardly resolved by the accumulation of more evidence.
Researchers often disagree.
These disagreements can stem from differences in knowledge, training and expertise,
but access to the same data and use of common methodology do not guarantee agreement.
Instead, disciplines often fracture into schools of thought with diverging stances.
We focused on divisions among researchers in psychological science,
asking them about their stances on 16 controversial themes.
These included far reaching issues such as the importance of the social environment on cognition,
the connection between language and thought, and the utility of computational metaphors
and mathematical models for human cognition.
Where researchers stood on these topics was correlated in both expected and unexpected ways
with what the researchers study and how they study it.
For example, use of neuroimaging was associated with having a lower belief
in the importance of social environments.
This suggests that it is not simply harder for those using neuroimaging techniques
to study social groups, they're also less impressed by theories that view social context
as foundational for understanding human cognition.
More generally, the use of specific research methods comes bundled with foundational beliefs
about what is important and what signifies plausibility and ultimately truth itself.
Differences in researchers stances on our controversial themes were also associated
with individual differences in various cognitive traits,
ranging from tolerance of ambiguity, creativity, and breadth of interest
to the need for cognition, visual imagery, and deliberation.
Just to briefly elucidate, need for cognition is essentially how much time
you want to spend thinking about something, how much you're willing to keep problem solving,
even if you maybe have an answer that could kind of semi plausibly fit the data,
and then visual imagery is about the extent, how vividly you tend to visualize things
and to visualize different things, so visualize objects as opposed to spatial relationships and stuff like that.
So getting into some really core differences in how minds work
and how this not only influences sort of like initial intuitions about research paths
that one might take and plausible models of the world,
but also the tools that one uses to find out more about the nature of reality.
And just to continue with one more paragraph from this paper,
our findings suggest that psychologists have different attitudes
regarding what solutions are epistemically satisfying
and worthy of contributing to the canon of psychological fact.
These divisions run deep, and so far as many such differences and foundational beliefs are often hidden,
one of the goals of this project was to make these divisions between visible and available.
They had a typo. That's not me misreading this. It's a preprint.
It should be these divisions between researchers or something like that,
but one of the goals of this project was to make these divisions between researchers or whatever
visible and available for public evaluation and critique.
We do not imply that certain cognitive traits are associated with worse science,
but demonstrate how they influence the approaches and answers that psychologists obtain in their research
and could slow, sidetrack, or indefinitely stall the resolution of truth claims within psychological science.
In the worst case scenario, cognitive differences could be exploited to prop up or even canonize
an evidently weak position that is intuitively attractive to researchers
and positions of power drop the fucking mic.
Okay, so that is exactly, some version of that is exactly what I was saying in my paper,
at a certain point we can only have so many nature versus nurture debates or whatever
before it just stops being interesting, before we're committing the ultimate sin in a consumer society
and we're just boring ourselves and other people, right?
And that what is interesting at that point is to ask, why do we disagree?
And to begin evaluating where these fundamental differences in reasoning processes come from
and what they're correlated with.
And then of course, if you're interested in power and the nature of politics and societies,
then to ask what the relationship between attitudes and aptitudes is here
and how that shapes the landscape of power we inhabit.
So what I want to note about that paper, even though they don't really explicitly draw it out too far,
is when they're talking about neuroimaging being associated with a certain set of perceptions
and core assumptions about how human behavior and perception works,
they're talking about a technical skill set that's associated with a certain set of beliefs.
And that is very much something that I got into in the paper that I wrote
and that I really have to shout out Frank here for turning me on to this book.
Engineers of Jihad, the curious connection between education and violent extremism
that was sort of like more extensively discussed in this book.
And then I'm going to rely on my own book for notes to summarize those findings.
In fact, I'll just go ahead and read from it rather than summarize it.
However much they disagree, scientists have a shared incentive to downplay their differences.
Credibility is often predicated on consensus.
As a result, there's a tragic lack of psychological research on the different kinds of minds present in the academy
and why they see the world so differently.
What little work exists has produced intriguing results.
In their book, Engineers of Jihad, the curious connection between violent extremism and education.
Diego Gambetta and Stefan Hertog summarize the correlations between psychological questionnaire results
and academic discipline among European male graduates, noting three statistical clusters.
First, those who specialize in engineering, law, medicine, economics, and business.
This population tends to score high on the psychometric need for closure and its sub-scale traditionalism.
As you can by now perhaps guess, this predicts authoritarian attitudes.
Second, those specializing in math and physical science have scores that are not significantly different from the population at large.
Third, those in the humanities and social sciences score low on need for closure and traditionalism.
Naturally, this predicts egalitarian attitudes.
Theory in this case predicts reality.
Participation in terrorist groups, I'm using the term here without judgments about political violence to reflect the author's phrasing,
strongly correlates with academic discipline as well.
The most striking of these results were that Islamic terrorists in Gambetta and Hertog's sample were 17 times more likely to be engineers
than would be expected from their proportion of the general population.
Engineers were also the most over-represented group in Western authoritarian contexts like the Nazi Party.
While social science and humanities graduates were heavily over-represented in egalitarian cohorts like the Red Army Faction,
science and math graduates participated in non-state political violence at the rate expected by their presence in the overall population.
In addition to the psychological clustering of their participants, these disciplines cluster in terms of three distinct approaches and objectives.
The authoritarian leaning of these, which seems to reliably end up in state power regardless of its ideology,
Stalin, after all, complained that all the socialists had been replaced by engineers,
is concerned with the application of existing knowledge toward a utilitarian end.
Engineering is technical, law is intentionally arcane, and business and administration are pragmatically low-brow,
thus they are not necessarily seen as cohesive, but psychologically, politically,
and in terms of their relationship to knowledge and its application, they are.
Let us call this cluster of psychological and political tendencies, TECHNICS.
TECHNICS is a group of social role specializations which tend to be inhabited by a distinct political personality.
It is concerned with self-assertion, the application of practical knowledge,
the reduction of reality to a utilitarian model, and the imposition of hierarchy.
Now I will move on to just summarizing it.
The math and science cluster here is the dynamic integration of open-ended inquiry into the nature of reality and practical application.
We do not see that fragmenting into utilitarianism on the one hand,
or the creation of meaning on the other, or let us say hierarchical utilitarianism
and egalitarian speculations about the nature of reality on the other.
The science and math cluster dances on that precipice, but of course,
there is the whole politics of not getting political, which seems to particularly influence people within those realms of the academy.
I read some quote from Jeff Schmidt's book, Discipline Minds, about this.
There is still this fracturing of self-occurring in those realms of the academy
where you are allowed to produce all these super compelling results,
but you are not really allowed to embody them or apply them in any way because that is seen as getting political,
and somehow it is not seen as getting political to just do a bunch of work and give it to the existing power structure
and divest yourself of any agency in how that work is utilized.
But then of course, this third statistical cluster that they are assessing,
in this case in European graduate students, male European graduate students,
from a few rounds of this really large sample size social psychological survey called the European Social Survey.
The social sciences and humanities are, I'll say a quote again,
moving to our third and final cluster, we must note with considerable horror, if you are anything like me,
the relationship between pragmatism and political orientation in the final of our academic factions.
The humanities and social sciences comprise many diverse tendencies.
All of these clusters are statistical constructs, of course.
But certainly in a valid disinterest in practical applications,
characterizes many social scientists and humanities scholars.
It is also very unlike the science cluster, disinterested in producing an internally consistent integrated body of knowledge.
Often it opposes any such effort.
Humanities and social science are often characterized by a kind of fatalism about knowledge
in attempts to undermine, interdict or deconstruct any attempt to speak truth
with elaborate literary texts pointing to an infinite set of open-ended possibilities.
So let us call this cluster literary experiments.
I say we should note this with horror because long before I read Engineers of Jihad,
I was constantly and painfully aware of the lack of practical knowledge and pragmatism in general
within many of the social movements I inhabited.
So I give these names to try to have concise terms for this correlation between aptitudes and attitudes,
calling the clusters techniques, science and literary experiments.
If you spent time in the academy or you read a lot of academic stuff, this should be kind of familiar.
And again, this is not, in the case of Gambetta and Heretog's work, they're correlating it with academic discipline
and that works well enough that produces striking enough correlations to observe a pattern.
But I would say that these differences as the authors of Why Do Scientists Disagree are getting into
really also transcend and subdivide academic disciplines.
For instance, there's very much what I would describe as a kind of technics science divide in biology
and this is something that I come back to over and over again as you have this one kind of biology
that doesn't really have a whole lot of biology in it, the sort of selfish gene.
Let's make out of the towering greatness of our disembodied thought processes,
let's just contemplate the nature of reality and how evolution must work according to these axioms that we've devised.
And then let's just do a bunch of mathematical modeling and insist this is what's going on,
without really condescending to look at actual organisms and how they actually function.
And then there's a more integrative approach to biology that is very much the ascending paradigm
within the field, that old kind of what I call the imaginary gene paradigm
or the gene for wholesale trait like adventurousness or intelligence or empathy or whatever.
That really is, it's essentially died in the field of biology or it's in very sharp decline.
It's still very much one that let's say the reading public,
people who would tend to have any kind of perception of the field from outside of it.
It's still one that really burdens the public perception of what biologists are saying.
So that's one example, sort of like a predictable set of correlated perceptual tendencies there.
The more techniques model of biology is very much about parts over holes.
It's about saying that organisms really aren't the agents of their, you know, aren't really units of selection.
Don't really have any agency in their own processes of evolution that genes,
these much smaller subcomponents of organisms are kind of essentially like dictatorially controlling them.
And then there's also a kind of like stasis over motion.
So, you know, it's like, and these genes that are in control of organisms as if manipulating robots or something.
They only change very slowly through random mutations.
So whatever, whatever behavior you're seeing now in an organism you can expect to see over the long march of millennia.
Then there's a model over reality component, you know, like we figured this all out by just sort of introspecting the nature of biology.
And we're sure it's right because the logical perfection of our model is more beautiful than the reality reports to describe.
Yeah, so, you know, these are correlated perceptual tendencies that we return to over and over again.
We could say broadly they characterize the reductive as opposed to the holistic worldview or the mechanistic as opposed to the animistic worldview.
So, you know, so that's one example of where there's a pretty like clear dividing line in a scientific discipline that is conspicuously conspicuously maps to these three tendencies.
You know, it's a it's a technics science divide.
And then I would say anthropology has a science literary experiments divide going on.
I think that should be like fairly familiar to anybody who's seen the critique.
I think the quote from to be in Cosmides classic 1992 essay, The Psychological Foundations of Culture is something like certainly one of the most highly rewarded talents.
And anthropology is the ability to turn the humanly familiar and to the unintelligible and the exotic, right?
But you know, this this way that some people are kind of like trying to understand humanity, which doesn't mean ignoring any particular context that any particular humans are in.
But, you know, it's not like you're not going to note it when there's some consistencies across different cultures or basic human tendencies that again like transcend and subdivide any given social grouping that you can find.
This of course has huge pertinence to the way we talk about politics and political power in the world we live in now because it's such a it's such a counterpoint to identity politics where we're supposed to be able to predict
the way people perceive the world and behave in it based on this really small set of identity variables.
But of course we see the same kinds of people in all these different groups behaving in very similar ways.
We see the same basic human tendencies surface in context after context.
And so a real discussion about how to how to bias the dynamics towards certain human tendencies and away from others has to be able to acknowledge the variability where we find it and not just traffic
and these idiotic generalizations about groups of people as insanely, you know, not that these variables aren't important.
They're just insufficient on their own, you know, variables as an insanely general as rich or poor or black or white man or woman, etc.
And so that's, you know, and then but then of course there's people in anthropology who are, you know, actually trying to do something we might call science which could be very helpful for projects of global survival.
And so you see these different you see these different sort of these three very broad tendencies and I am obviously so aware and the paper why scientists disagree should point us in the direction of some of these kind of like infinite nuances
and sub tendencies that would exist within any of these tendencies but I'm just pointing out how these three tendencies can be correlated with discipline with academic disciplines at the
course is scale like at the course is statistical scale and then we can see divides within disciplines if we look a little closer and then at some point, you know, you can always you can always refine your maps of individual
until you're talking about actual individuals or like tiny little rooms full of people in particular academies somewhere or whatever but, you know, looking at it like this gives us this sense of the broader tendencies and how they play out and how they end up
not just sort of being venues for the expression of different kinds of minds and the way that they're good at different things how different academic tendencies are not just venues for the expression of the correlation between attitudes and aptitudes
but how at a certain point they're going to really tend to amplify these different kinds of these different tendencies we see in different people.
And one piece of research I'll point out very quickly that validates this is a couple papers produced by one of the authors of which is the guy who created a major psychometric for evaluating political difference.
It's called the social dominance orientation scale and he has this schema of hierarchy enhancing and hierarchy attenuating disciplines and he looks at the correlation between the scale, the SDO scale and different academic disciplines
and does so asks people in different disciplines you know finds these sort of what should hopefully by now he's working in the US as opposed to Europe but finds what should now hopefully be somewhat predictable correlations like engineers
tend towards a higher social dominance orientation but he he administers these questionnaires as people are entering professional training and after they've been there for a while and does indeed find that the psychological tendencies that cause people to self select into these different professional pathways also amplifies those very psychological tendencies.
Now it never ceases to amaze me the extent to which I really do find the need and trying to understand the world and how we've gotten into this uncannily terrible situation that we're in.
How often I feel the need to point out things that are happening or have happened in the academy or critique certain tendencies within the academy but it's less so my case.
I mean what's important about this set of correlations between attitudes and attitudes we see in the academy in terms of how it plays out in professional social role specializations is obviously less like it.
You know there's certain kinds of people involved in different political violence with different professional backgrounds outside of institutions of power what really matters to me is that it's a certain subset of.
Psychologies that the that the techniques orientation tends to be the people within institutions of power how you have what I like to call the narcissists and the technocrats.
Coming from engineering business and law or broadly speaking inhabiting a psychology that tends to select into those disciplines and has a very map over territory self assertion over participation way of looking at the world.
But so that is important that I mean that truly is worth noting and thinking about and thinking about how to counter.
I would say considering the striking convergence of outcomes of you know in terms of the way that political institutions with ostensibly very different ideologies this is kind of the the James Scott seeing like a state critique you know.
Considering how systems of power with such different self descriptions have converged on the same outcomes.
I think it really is worth talking about systems not only in terms of what they say they believe or are about or trying to achieve but in terms of what kinds of people exercise what kinds of power in them very recurrent theme in the book.
But I also want to get into this notion that what how you know this process of fracture we see in the academy this amplification of individual differences and the correlation between attitudes and aptitudes.
It is not at all unique to the academy but it's where it's where it's most discernible and the reason for that is partially obviously because the academy is a place where people are you know producing very explicit bodies of knowledge or whatever it is they're producing.
But you know are generating explicit stories about the world of some kind or another.
But what I think is also true is that it's just where a process we are now seeing throughout the entirety of our society happened first.
I often think about how the first time that I encountered in anarchist journal I was it was in a bookstore when I was 12 in Vermont and I read it and then kind of immediately became a social theorist right you know.
So now I'm writing something for this journal which I never submitted but kind of finding out I can so distinctly remember this moment of noticing that I wasn't really just writing about something that I had already explicitly formulated and thought about that I had this sort of set of intuitions.
This you know like like it was in fact the case that I wanted to write for an anarchist journal and not some other kind of journal but that so much of the of the so many of the explicit claims I was making so much of the explicit characterizations of the world that I was producing.
I was kind of coming up with in the process of writing.
So this gets into the whole kind of Ronald Engelhardt self expression values thing that we've talked about way back in some of those like group mind podcasts.
But generally like we can summarize this as just saying that communications technologies is how Engelhardt would have put it we can you know say phones and social media and corporate platforms in general.
The Internet doesn't really exist so much you know let's let's call it the corporate platform complex or something like that.
All that stuff has kind of put a whole lot of people who would have gone through life without ever undergoing a process like that one that I went through when I was 12 years old of initially being like I'm kind of finding out what I think about the world by trying to articulate a set of positions.
There's a very entangled process happening here a whole lot of people who wouldn't have bothered to do that who never would have felt compelled to scribble away on their manifestos for obscure political journals.
Given a certain set of tools and a certain connectivity to the world find themselves doing that.
And so the liberal narrative of course is that there's such a thing as experts they all hang out at universities.
They all basically agree on the nature of reality and for some reason that nobody can seem to understand you know surely it has nothing to do with people telling people telling other people that their kids have mental disorders.
Because they listen to heavy metal and smoke weed surely it has nothing to do with experts claiming that there's weapons of mass destruction in Iraq or that clear cutting is good for forests or anything like that.
But for some just totally incomprehensible reason people have ceased to trust experts and that we are now in this process of epistemic fracture and that it should be understood as the antithesis of what goes on in universities.
I think that's just so wrong just so so so very wrong and it's really kind of the opposite.
It's like what happened in the academy was a precursor to what's happening now and that's that really is the right way to understand it.
And so here is where I want to talk about how we can see this in terms of the themes I was talking about in the last episode which if you didn't listen to it I can still you know briefly articulate.
How these notions of a loss of agency connection and a sense of participation can be thought of to robustly characterize all of the different world views for as much as they are superficially massively divergent.
The different world views that we find in the academy or just among people at large and to talk about kind of like what that process though the process of differentiating from one another into these modes.
That are so conspicuous for their lack of mutual comprehensibility but also you know and therefore for their lack of a capacity to engage people in any kind of collective endeavor a sense that we could all participate in something that might make life a little better
or annihilation a little less imminent.
And yeah to like really talk about more the internal subjective psychological realities at work here and ways that we could try to be less fractured beings.
And I guess where I'll start probably the the most important foundational premise here is that individual differences are differences in thresholds for the emergence of a particular perception or behavior.
And that that's kind of the core the the book that I wrote really utilizes that as a core way of looking at different socio political situations and strategies for influencing them.
It's this question of what intensities of what kinds of stimulus or you know conditions material conditions circumstances people find themselves in what intensity of a given condition will elicit a given behavior or perception in different kinds of people.
And so mapping different response curves across a spectrum of the intensity of some condition whether it's being threatened by with violence by somebody who has a lot of capacity for violence or being exhausted from toiling in miserable conditions
day after day or whatever it is you know what will elicit a an act of defensive aggression or an act of submission or what will cause people to kind of shut down and be numb from all the exhaustion.
You know all of these different questions that people exhibit such different response thresholds with respect to an example and this kind of gets into what kind of life you have lived.
I think there are people who feel much more like however convincing scientific arguments to this effect are they feel like they have always been more or less a person who has one more or less cohesive set of reasoning processes and priorities
tends to pick out the same set of variables from a situation and ignore the same sets of variables and then you know if life puts you in situations that that elicit what we might just call other selves.
You can sometimes really see how you truly do contain multitudes how there are these different people inside of you.
An example that I may or may not have used on this podcast before but one that had just that I think about all the time because I really don't feel like I would have intuitive insight into how intense this dynamic is.
Were it not for this one experience is without going into a whole lot of detail there was exactly one time in my life where I was in a situation where there was really like a whole lot of money on the proverbial table you know where there was really like an opportunity to kind of get rich quick.
And I was truly shocked by what I would say I experienced was not that I became this kind of person but that I was definitely observing the emergence of this person within myself who had you know it's all this stuff that I've talked about generalizing about these kinds of people on this podcast before.
This person was characterized by this extraordinary one could perhaps say heroic constriction of vision where that objective became really the only salient variable in the world or.
All the other variables that were discernible or meaningful were subordinate to it they were they were all related to the question of how do we get that fucking money you know.
And yeah it just it just gave me such a sense of what is actually happening in the heads of the people who are destroying the world.
And I'm so bothered by it to this day because it is that correlation between attitudes and aptitudes where you know I say I say a heroic constriction of vision but it was also like a heroic level of motivation.
And I really saw the ways that you know if this is familiar at all if if you feel like the people who are winning are just kind of practicing exactly you know there's exactly one response that they have to any given situation they find themselves in and it's just blind self assertion.
The answer to any problem is always blind self assertion just uncomprehending pursuit of self interest.
If that sounds at all familiar you know I could really see that and see how it could easily defeat other modes of being that are more lucid and coherent and certainly a lot more likeable.
But that just aren't as I don't know fucking ravenous you know and I do have like different ways of visualizing this or describing it metaphorically or semi metaphorically.
I sometimes think well I'll mention one that I know is out there circulating that I like OK.
And that's this analogy of the self as a bus full of passengers with one driver so there's there's a self who is actually driving the bus actually you know operating the behavioral apparatus if you want to sound really mechanistic and alienated about it.
Just moving around and doing things in the world if you don't.
But then everybody else on the bus is kind of observing what's happening and should the need arise could get up from a passenger seat and start driving.
I like that one OK.
I sometimes think of I think of it what I call it council consciousness where I think that you know the same thing there's kind of there's many selves within us and I imagine them all as this kind of this like wheel of faces.
They're they're all your face or my face when I'm thinking about myself that are kind of inside of you and they're all talking to each other and observing what's happening with the self that is at the front.
But that the wheel can always spin that you know that the one in front is at least somewhat listening to what all the other ones are saying.
And that the wheel can always spin so that another one becomes primary while still listening to you know while still integrating input of the others.
So to say this in less abstract language it's like if you are the same person when you are defending a PhD thesis or saying something to somebody you're falling in love with or getting into a fight then you're doing a couple of those things badly.
And but when you're doing any of those things it's like you've become this particular kind of person who really does have a truly different way of reasoning about the world and finds different forms of stimulus salient or irrelevant and all that sometimes talks very differently
and moves and you know has different modes of embodiment and we can map all this all the way down to neurophysiology and hormone levels and patterns of brain activity and all these other things.
This is very you know this is not speculation this is very much biologically real.
But you know it's kind of like in a moment of behavior it's like if you're at a party the guy who would come to the front if you were in a fight is just kind of like hanging out in the back you know just sort of like watching the party happen
and that's good that's definitely better than not and but then you know it's like if you do get into a fight that guy comes to the front but the actual experience of navigating all the behavioral possibilities in that moment of violence
is heavily mediated by all these other kinds of observers who are interacting with each other and you know and kind of been like yeah don't don't don't do that though you know like like you're doing what you're doing makes sense to but don't don't do that you know stuff like that.
And so there's this real question if we if we look at ourselves as people who because of the correlation between attitudes and aptitudes have failed in some really meaningful and profound way to develop the capabilities necessary
to assert a different kind of power in the world than the one that currently exists we can kind of think about the different selves we contain and the thresholds for their emergence and practices of essentially allowing us to cycle between different modes of selfhood in a more fluid and adaptive manner.
So now this ties in with the book we were talking about in the last episode Madness and Modernism Insanity in the Light of Modern Art Literature and Thought by Louis Sass.
Because I think that this process essentially involves the ability to experience different selves within the same body as a fundamentally real phenomenon to to acknowledge that that is in fact what's really happening without the uncanny sense of emotional horror
that sometimes characterizes those experiences particularly when people are experiencing some form of psychotic illness.
So what I would say is that we could place schizophrenia and related forms of psychosis on one end of a continuum and mystical experience of the variety where
there's a sense of unity with something that is broader than self but also is self.
So it still has that quality of self regarding self as self unified but distinct overlapping selves all that kind of stuff.
So the continuum is really not the logical structure in both cases there's this experience of multiple self hoods examining one another from within the same body
or self hoods that extend out into the world but still are kind of like peering back at the self that peers at the self that is the world and all that infinitely entangled stuff.
So the continuum is not any difference in that it's really just a continuum of the emotional and psychological valence that that experience has.
So in other words that can be a source of uncanny terror or profound bliss.
And so Louis Sass talks a lot about the uncanny terror variety of it in madness and modernism saying that for as much as schizophrenia has these extraordinary diversity of symptoms that an underlying feature of so many of them
is a sort of introspection consciousness reflecting on consciousness reflecting on consciousness this hyper reflexivity as he phrases it that feels very disturbing and uncomfortable.
I would relate it to an experience that I may or may not have described before sometimes in one phase of me going more intense with the practice of meditation every time when I would start like right within the first
90 seconds of it I would have this moment as I was observing this perpetual stream of is it dialogue is it monologue but the stream of language in my in my mind and I would have this moment of thinking
you know who is talking to whom here and which one am I and that really could be quite frightening as Sass says describing this phenomenon in general.
There is a potential for a strangement in every act of consciousness to become aware of something to know it as an object is necessarily to become aware of its separateness its non identity with the knowing self that one feels one self to be at that very instant
to perceive something is it so facto to cast it outward into the domain of not me that lies at the farthest reaches of the experiential universe and since this is an essential fact about consciousness it must really apply to self awareness as well
to know my own self is inevitably to multiply or fractionate myself it is to create a division between my knowing consciousness and my existence as a perceivable individual who interacts with others or subsists as a body of flesh and blood
and so he talks about we touched on this in the last episode about schizophrenia really either just maybe not existing at all or being very uncommon in non-industrialized societies although other forms of psychosis which are not common in
non-industrialized societies were very much present or are in some cases and he calls them more transient and socially engaged forms of psychosis transient in the sense that they tend not to last as long but socially engaged in the sense that often
these were forms of psychosis that were associated with becoming a profit or something like that you know that they would be sort of like vocational callings that would compel people to be extremely gregarious in certain ways and so you know to be a
profit is to wander around saying I know something that is true that matters to everybody this is a shared truth that I'm art you know maybe not everybody has come to see the world this way but it's relevant to everybody and we should engage with this truth in some way that there's
some sense of collective participation in in this truth that one is trying to promote or whatever and he brings a great deal of evidence to bear in support of this claim that with industrialization becomes this new form of madness that
is far more introspective that has way more of this quality of consciousness examining itself and then all the uncanny horror that that implies will occur you know for instance he talks about how I cited other arguments in the last
episode but just just to toss another one into the mix he talks about how physical proximity to urban areas in New Guinea is proportional to the incidents of schizophrenia per se there's more and more of it the closer you get to the city how
recent immigrants to the UK from non-industrialized societies show rates of schizophrenia that seem to be like fairly proportional to the degree of isolation they're experiencing in the neighborhoods they settle in you know if they have a community of people they
speak the same language as stuff like this what he what he describes as a proportionality to the extent of social defeat their experiencing which obviously is a salient way of characterizing it for our purposes and so this stuff is
complex and I might not totally succeed here in conveying what I'm trying to convey or being completely convincing in can that what I'm trying to convey is real but a thing that I want to note is that again acknowledging
that we're talking about things that happen in the academy because they are diagnostic of what is happening in the broader society but for as much as what we're calling the literary experiments tendency within the academy loves to talk about reductionism
and that's kind of their dirty word that they use to dismiss any kind of physical science explanations of pretty much anything at least if it involves human behavior and how it is pretty easy and how we've kind of done some past episodes pointing out these similarities
between certain technical and scientific modes of reasoning the mode of reasoning in what we're calling the techniques the techniques domain
and certain forms of psychotic illness that the literary experience experiments genre really is like just a different kind of manifestation of the same underlying set of tendencies so bear with me I'm going to try to do my best job here to to make that case
so to real quick because because this is this we already did this in episodes like philosophy or schizophrenia but I'll use a different example real quick to give some sense of what I mean when I say that there's you know sort of a fairly extensive literature
out there pointing to convergences between the reductive mechanistic worldview and psychotic illness a whole lot of schizophrenic symptoms because of this quality of observing observation of consciousness reflecting on itself can just go in all kinds of different ways
and the more the more one stares at one's own mind the more kind of strangely alien it can become like the man was saying so in the book he quotes a patient saying psychic manifestations occur with the awareness of they're not being mind of being alien automatic independent arriving from elsewhere
right so eventually as you stare at your own mind it starts to seem foreign and that becomes uncanny and terrifying so we can juxtapose that with a quote from Richard Dawkins from the selfish gene a book about biology that is very you know an absolute exemplar of the techniques paradigm
in which he says now they referring to genes swarm in huge colonies safe inside gigantic lumbering robots sealed off from the outside world communicating with it by torturous indirect roots manipulating it by remote control
they are in you and me they created us body and mind and their preservation is the ultimate rationale for our existence so that's like you know that's really like somewhere on a line between organisms are machines and organisms are like things that have machines inside them that are manipulating by remote control right
and out of pettiness again I have to acknowledge that I got here on my own but in reading Ian McGill christs the matter with things our brains our delusions in the unmaking of the world his successor to the master in his emissary the divided brain in the making of the western world
which we've talked about on this podcast quite a bit this is like his enormous you know twice the length of the master in his emissary book where he's really just going into copious detail about on the evidentiary foundations of the brain hemisphere hypothesis the hypothesis that in imbalance in modes of perception between the two brain hemispheres has hugely hugely influenced
the world we live in but he's also kind of breaking down I mean so that that really struck me reading master was you know how you could apply this to all these different domains of science and whatnot and it would be a very productive way of explaining a lot of things
that's exactly what he did so he got here first he he also goes into a bunch of Richard Dawkins and shows exactly these parallels that I'm that I'm that I was just drawing out but you know whatever pettiness compels me to mention that I found it on my own
and so you know this this quote from this patient of psychic manifestations feeling like they come from elsewhere is probably it is easy to relate to what is probably still one of the most famous kind of like diagnostic case studies in the schizophrenic literature
Schizophrenia literature which is about a patient describing and drawing something they call the influencing machine but the same thing is you know it's the sense of the self as somehow foreign or alien or alienated and being moved around or shaped or influenced by some external thing in this way that you know again
this is kind of about emotional valence because obviously we are in fact interacting with external forces but in a normal integrated participatory experience of reality we have this sense of self and sense of world and we're not feeling a breakdown between the two in a way that feels terrifying
but then when we're in the mystical experience we are experiencing a breakdown between self and world but it's just awesome right that's that's the thing I was getting at
okay and so so that kind of establishes this idea again this is something this really is kind of complex and I if if all of this if I don't totally totally nail this and you're like did that entirely make sense the answer may or may not be yes
I just I'm going to just do my best but so now we've kind of established for those who hadn't listened to relevant past episodes that there is this kind of robust literature comparing the mechanistic world view to forms of psychosis
but but what I want to try to establish is that techniques and literary experiments are both different manifestations of the same underlying dynamics so I'll read a couple I'll read somewhat extensively from SAS here
this is from a section in the introduction called dehumanization or the disappearance of the active self
the development in the 20th century of what has seemed a higher sophistication about human consciousness has been accompanied, oddly enough, by a certain fragmentation, pacifization and sense of depletion
by a loss of the self's sense of unity capacity for effective or voluntary action or even basic existence
this has gone along with an ethic of impersonality that contrasts sharply with the romantic cult of the self
and then he's going to describe these two different variants that I think correspond broadly speaking to literary experiments and techniques respectively
one variant of this tendency might be termed an impersonal subjectivism or a subjectivity without a subject
in this form of dehumanization, common in novels by Ford, Maddox, Ford, Virginia Woolf and Natalie Sarate, among others
a fragmentation from within a face's reality while rendering the self a mere occasion for the bustle of independent subjective events
sensations, perceptions, memories and the like
the overwhelming vividness, diversity and independence of this experiential swarm fragment the self obliterating its distinctive features
the sense of unity and control
and so just quickly before we move on with a whole lot more of this fairly dense language
what I'm relating that to is the literary experiments tendency which has wrought such absolute havoc on social movements
of this kind of ceaseless introspection about the self-examining self thing where you're always asking how you know what you really know
and what unconscious frames of reference you failed to inhabit and you're kind of breaking yourself apart
and not really trusting like he says that you have a capacity for effective or voluntary action
because you're breaking everything down in this way that is both very introspective but also creates this real sense of impotence
and then we can contrast this with something that's more externally oriented but also tends to come with a sense of omnipotence
which I would relate to the Technics mode of being
Sass says
has nevertheless held an important place throughout the 20th century
and then skipping a little ahead
obviously there are radical differences between
derealization and unworlding
the subjectivist and objectivist variance of modernist world hood
but there are also important affinities
in both cases the ego or experiential self is depleted and pacified
either it becomes an impotent observer of thing like yet inner experiences
an impotent observer of thing like yet inner experiences
of sensations, images and the like
derealization
or else it is transformed into a machine like entity placed in a world of static and neutral objects
unworlding
in both cases the objects of human experience are reified
turned into opaque or intransitive entities that can do no more than manifest their own mere presence
when the objects in question are subjective phenomena
they seem incapable of referring to a transcendent external world
one experiences experience as it were
when they are objective things
they seem unable to evoke or convey human significance or value
one perceives meaningless bits of matter
so again I mean maybe this is actually like landing and I'm just breaking it down too much or whatever
but just again to relate this rather ponderous language to what we're talking about
we can say this thing about literary experiments when the objects in questions are subjective phenomenon
they seem incapable of referring to a transcendent external world
one experiences experience as it were
so we're constantly introspecting without this real sense of agency or participation or meaning or connection
and when we're talking about the external world then we're kind of going out of our way
to point out how we have all this exquisite technical knowledge here
think of the passage from Dawkins about gene swarming and huge colonies manipulating us by remote control
we're talking about how the external world is something we have all this exquisite sort of like technical comprehension of
but that that very comprehension negates our agency connection and meaning
you know so a radical divergence but this sort of like very very fundamental shared emotional psychological valence
and set of implications for how these two ways of being actually make us you know what they're actually manifesting
where they actually come from in terms of our developmental experience and technological mass societies
the kind of stuff that they make us good at doing
the kinds of experience they make us attend to what they help us see or not see
and I think really the points the best point I can make is that they're all fragmentary in some sense
they all none of it involves this sort of sense of participation in reality where we can bring our whole selves to bear
and so you end up with people who are broken in one way or the other and then to relate this back to
what we were talking about at the beginning of the episode
which way you want to be broken how you want to be wrong
which set of tendencies within yourself you want amplified and which you want to allow to atrophy
kind of depends on your thresholds for the emergence of different behaviors and perceptions
one self-selects into these different forms of fragmentation and then they amplify that very process of self-selection
and so I will again quote from my own book to kind of reiterate these points
just pointing us once again our attention once again to the fact that
the literary experiments mode of reasoning has come to really profoundly dominate within social movements
while techniques dominates within institutions of power
so I say techniques makes the world more simple in service of physically manipulating it
literary experiments disregards physical action to hyper focus on the world's complexity contingency and particularity
if techniques says out of the disembodied rational perfection of my model I can know everything
literary experiments says owing to my ceaseless attention to perception itself I can know nothing
for all their superficial divergences both techniques and literary experiments are characterized by self-contained logic
in service of a strangely passive kind of power
schizophrenic delusion along with narratives generated by techniques and literary experiments
involve the free interplay of feelings of impotence and omnipotence
when techniques tells us that by mathematical modeling alone
biologists have determined that humans are robots manipulating the world by genetic remote control
we simultaneously learn of their awesome powers of comprehension and of their complete lack of integrated agency or selfhood
we see everything including that we are mechanically subservient to an essentially alien force
when literary experiments tells us that the humanly familiar is incomprehensibly exotic
it is announcing its power to undermine our sense of reality
but also that knowledge and meaning lie forever beyond its own grasp
we see everything wrong with what others see and thus we also see that truth is unattainable to us
and so again referencing how all of these diverse world views and modes of reasoning
whether in schizophrenia or in the academy or in society at large
all kind of derive from this loss of a sense of connection, agency and participation
so I'm kind of pointing out for all their superficial divergences how these different academic tendencies
can be pretty meaningfully characterized as powerful sets of tools for calling other people idiots
how they all affect to have some access to some secret knowledge or hidden meanings about the world
that negate the possibility of participating in collective endeavors towards collectively beneficial ends
and I say these concrete but abstract, impotent but omnipotent conclusions
for all their logical divergence are often presented in the same tone
that of sneering contempt for anyone who does not already understand their validity
you think you know something about this world and you want to act accordingly
that's just genes for particular behaviors operating outside of their evolutionary context
which negates the meaning of your experience or it's just your socially constructed frame of reference
which also negates the meaning of your experience
either way you're an idiot for participating in life rather than stepping back from it
in evaluating the secret meaning of things that only we see
SAS is speaking of the convergent tendencies of schizophrenics and modern artists
when he notes a quote distinctive combination of superiority and impotence
combined with at least a hint of desperation
but we could equally apply this description to techniques and literary experiments
and superiority and impotence combined with far more than a hint of desperation
are arguably the most prevailing emotional themes of social movements in their ceaseless crises
endlessly reflecting on themselves, endlessly critiquing the efforts and attitudes of others
while doing nothing in the world
okay so while I'm emphatic that we have been essentially kind of talking about one thing here
and that is how we've become too fragmented
to both be people who understand the world and can exercise power in it
how we can think of techniques as people who can exercise power but do not understand the world
literary experiments as people who I don't know
maybe sort of understand at least certain aspects of the world
but certainly can't exercise any power
and how there's this you know these forms of fracture we see in the academy
are also present in the world at large
and particularly how we can map those two academic tendencies to institutional power
and whatever very limited forms of power social movements tend to exercise
you know so what this has all been about
is this adventure that we're on of attempting to become more integrated beings
capable of more fluidly cycling between the different forms of selfhood we possess
in service of somehow you know exercising a kind of power in the world that is based on comprehending it
that's the unitary thing that all of this has been about
but admittedly we have woven a fairly tangled web to get there
the world is just complex and sometimes when we try to tell simple stories
it's essentially equivalent to saying that we're trying to tell wrong stories
but now I want to finally relate this to this question of
how the experience of a multiplicity of selves within us
within a given body or whatever all kind of evaluating each other
the sensation of self regarding self
is I think a necessary is necessary for human cognitive evolution
and for the kind of experiential maturity we need to effect this form of integrated power I'm speaking of
and that the question becomes not how do we avoid that sometimes you know potentially quite disorienting
and terrifying experience but how do we shift its emotional valence
and in so with reference to that I want to return to the ritual processes
or movement processes or healing processes or however one chooses to phrase it
of shaking that I was describing in the last episode
and you know I just kind of spoke about very briefly this sort of conversion experience
this very singular experience in my life that I had maybe about I don't know 10 days ago by now
a little less than that actually
and I still feel really unclear on how to talk about it
I've had some pretty earnest searching conversations with people who I feel know about this stuff
or work in some kind of practice of helping people go through intense experiences heal and things like that
definitely carrying this sense of having something that I feel should belong to everybody
and that I want to share and also really being kind of confused or confused
but just you know wanting to carefully assess how to do that because there was a sense of this being something
it could maybe make the analogy to psychedelics like it can be amazing or it could be something else
and so I'm going to I'm going to just describe
no what I'll do is I'm going to read this little passage from the book that I was reading from last time
Shaking Medicine the Healing Power of Ecstatic Movement
but a different portion in which Bradford Keening describes his conversion experience
or the phase immediately after his spontaneous conversion experience
mine being elicited by reading this book although there were many precursors
this had been something in my life in a less intense form for many years
but so you know he's just describing this big revelation he had where he shook for hours
and you know all the things that happened when one does that happened
and he says for nearly a decade I shook only privately
though I was extremely grateful that the shake had come into my life
and believed that it was the greatest gift I would ever receive
trying to find its place in the world frustrated me
where do I go to shake in public whom can I share this with
can I make a living with the shake
I felt like I had the secret to the universe but I would sound inflated or crazy
if I opened my mouth and articulated the enthusiasm I had for shaking ecstasy
fortunately the shake brought with it an inner voice and guiding force
if I shook and listened I would be given inner guidance
you can call this enriched intuition
spiritual guidance
ancestral help
divine teaching
God's instruction
channeled directions
or unconscious wisdom
because it was happening to me with strong authority
I didn't need a name for it
in fact naming it seemed to be unnecessary and absurd
I simply knew what would happen when I allowed the trembling to tune into the right frequency
or make a connection
and then he goes on to describe how kind of like listening to this inner voice
guided him through his pathway into the academy
becoming a researcher of these various practices in these different cultures
that all are variants on this form of ecstatic shaking
how it took them to black churches
and to the Kalahari and to Japan and all that good stuff
so one can certainly see how having a revelatory experience
involving an inner voice and that inner voice guiding your behavior
and indeed your career path and all that
again this is just a question of emotional valence
that could be beautiful and amazing
or that could be psychosis
and the difference really is kind of in how it feels and how
how your behavior manifests to others
like whether you seem lucid and coherent
and integrated in some fashion to the people who are around you
and so I'm really not ready to or maybe it's just not necessary that I ever do
I still really don't want to like talk in a ton of detail
about what happened to me
it also just feels kind of ponderous because
as is the case with revelatory mystical experiences
it was everything right you know it was all of it
it was the love and the rage and the pain and everything
but there were a few really unique aspects of it
I guess I will go ahead and just describe
three things that happened to me that I had never experienced before
just in like real fleeting detail
the last of which really relates to this kind of like
sense of a multiplicity of selves or whatever
so what I briefly touched on in the last episode
is that I had never felt as unafraid as I did in that experience
and there really is some radical difference
in how I'm experiencing the world
this should be pretty familiar to a lot of experiences
with people either from their own experience
or from descriptions of trauma
but there was always a sense of experiential distance
that I had that I was very aware of
that stems from early traumatic experience
this kind of this isn't happening this isn't real
that was sort of always there
and if I reflected on it or tried to
you know transcend it in some fashion
the mere sort of presence of myself in whatever environment
and situation I was in would feel really threatening
and overwhelming there's just something scary about
the sense of like I'm really here this is really happening
and that has gone away
that has gone away that went away that night
and it's just gone
the other thing that I experienced that I never had before
was that for as much as I've had many sort of senses
of extended selfhood and mystical experiences and what not
people have you know I've heard endless accounts of people
describing of people experiencing
this sense of universal love of being immersed in infinite love
and I definitely never experienced anything like that before
and after the shaking proper you know
after the sun had come up and I had been shaking for hours
there was a phase where I was very much still in it
but no longer shaking where I was just laying on my back
with my arm extended to the sky
feeling immersed in this flow of infinite love
quite remarkable experience
but then the thing that is pertinent to what we're talking about here
is that I very much very much had this kind of inner voice thing
that he's describing
and so a thing I'll relate it to is
you know one of the cultures he discusses in this book
that does this is the Bushman
Kalahari Hunter gatherers
he uses the term Bushman and so do they
and so maybe that's just really a better
a better way to say it but
they have this kind of
they have a shake in ecstatic shaking tradition
that might be about as old as humanity or a little older right
and within that tradition not everybody does this
this is something while everybody can shake
there's only some people who go into it this intensely
is I think how it works but
there's this sense that people will get at some points
that people that there's too much that the person is going into too
intensive of a frenzy or whatever
and they'll kind of come and put their hands on him
it's usually him
and sort of like help
they say cool the person down
they say that the person is getting too hot
and they're helping cool them down
but you know
sort of like calm down this
infinite vitality that's flowing through this person
and there wasn't a phase in there where
my behavior was like getting pretty epileptic you know
it was pretty crazy frenzy happening
and then it really was like
I don't know how to say it but
you know it was like a voice said
okay calm down
and
I just did in the thing
that I'm trying to point to here
is that
the voice felt
really just infinitely you know exactly like
exactly like he said
I don't feel like I need a name for it or anything
but it felt
it felt
infinitely wise and
mature that's really the right word
it felt very very developed and very just
aware of a lot a very vast benevolent maturity and wisdom
those are the words
and
it felt
quite undeniable you know it felt
good to listen to it
what I'm trying to get at here is that
there was this subjective sense of it being
kind of like wiser than
however we want to say it wiser than me or wiser than the self
that I'm the many different selves that I'm usually manifesting
like this was a vaster more integrated
self that was kind of
off you know giving some input or something like that
the way it felt kind of foreign and at the same time it felt
utterly
continuous with myself
and that is
sort of like the essence of the mystical experience is that you're having this sense of connection
with something that has to be other
or else it's just literally you in your body
and that can still that doesn't feel like connection that doesn't create that sense of participation and connection
that we so desire but
you know so it's like a sense of connection also requires a sense of separateness
I guess that's the best way that I can put it and that was happening
in this way that just felt so
fucking good
and it was like
uncanny in this way right
it was like wow who's like relating it to the meditation thing like
okay who is talking to who and which one is me
which one am I
and so that is kind of the thesis of the episode
again you know at some point I'll have to
kind of do more on the subject of ecstatic shaking
when I feel like I can when I feel like I'm ready but
that's sort of the thesis is that
to become people who are both capable of understanding the world and exercising power within it
we need to be capable of fluidly navigating
the multiple selves we contain which means having an experience of just
acknowledging the existence of all those multiple selves without freaking out
and feeling like it's horrifying and shutting down or rejecting that reality
and that there are certain ways to do that
where they're not any less strange but the strangeness isn't uncanny or you know the strangeness isn't terrifying
and that there are some rituals that there are probably many different ways to achieve that
but that one that's really accessible is this kind of part this you know this collective shaking thing that
I'm trying to understand better and learn if I can spread it or try to spread it and if so how
and that obviously there are many other things that we have to do to become more integrated beings like
going shooting unless we're already really good at that or learning public speaking unless we're already really good at that
you know that there's all just kinds of practical sort of undertakings that relate to this broad theme of becoming more integrated
but that there's a need for a sort of meta framework for navigating the experiential qualities that come with understanding
how complex of entities we truly are and how many different selves our bodies do in fact contain
we have to quit viewing man as a single psychological entity that in fact his psychological self is a multiple self
that he has a variety of mental systems existing in his brain they have emotions, they have memories, they have incentives, they have destinies
and they're able to control the motor apparatus by which I mean they're able to make movements
they're able to actually precipitate behaviors on the part of someone and once those actions are completed
here comes his verbal system in to give an explanation and to propose a theory to itself to explain why these actions were carried out