Title: What Is Politics Interview With Daniel pt 1
Episode #: 46
Episode ID: 10301941
Source: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/10301941-what-is-politics-interview-with-daniel-pt-1.mp3
------------------------------------------------------------

=== EPISODE METADATA ===
Generated: 2026-01-12 01:02:06
Episode ID: 17205513
MP3 File: 17205513-love-to-the-fighters.mp3
Title: Love to the Fighters
Podcast/Artist: World Tree Center for Evolutionary Politics
Album/Series: Fight Like An Animal
Source URL: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/17205513-love-to-the-fighters.mp3
========================
What is the highest technique you hope to achieve?
You have no technique.
Very good.
What are your thoughts when facing the point?
They don't matter.
Greetings friends, I'm Arnold Schroeder and this is Fight Like An Animal.
Find episode bibliographies and other texts at againsttheinternet.com.
If you'd like to support this work materially, as well as get occasional fictional episodes of this podcast set in 2050,
check out patreon.com slash biological singularity.
And if you would like access to the World Tree Discord server where people who met through this podcast talk about all manner of interesting things and do all manner of interesting projects,
please write to me and tell me a little bit about yourself or, for that matter, write to me for any other reason at all.
And I will infinitely and always be apologizing to those people who I did not get back to for one reason or another,
but, you know, in general, I really do love to get email and really do try to write back.
Okay.
So friends, I'm just going to do a little episode here, which isn't particularly like me.
And I'm not exactly sure why.
It seems like there's something quite complex going on with my psychology in relation to podcasting in particular, not in relation to working.
I have been working a ludicrous amount for a very long time.
And this is kind of a familiar process.
There's definitely it's both definitely true that I'm trying to do too many things at the same time.
And a lot of this would probably look a lot more coherent to a lot of people if I followed through from start to finish on tasks in a more serial sequential fashion.
But it's also I feel I feel familiar with this particular phase I'm in because I've been in it any number of other times.
And I do feel confident that there'll be a number of pretty good outcomes.
So, you know, maybe that is just part of it.
But it also kind of felt like I feel like one thing that I'm always doing, whatever I'm specifically saying is that all all of us, any time we do anything worth doing, any time we try rather than succumb to despair or just, you know, try to affect any outcome in the world whatsoever towards better rather than worse states.
You know, is that there's sort of like an underlying message towards everybody else of it's worth it to remain engaged and to not just completely succumb to whatever comforting stimulus happens to be around or to suicide or anything else like that.
And maybe maybe it kind of feels, I guess, in particular with the the political shifts we're experiencing here in America, like a couple years ago, I sort of stopped what I was working on at the time and did these three episodes addiction madness and despair.
And that was kind of me, you know, assessing my own internal process in relation to, you know, of deliberation about the value of the work that I was doing.
So, you know, instead of more episodes about the biology of some particular political behavior, while they were certainly oriented towards broad social dynamics, there is also this element of
of assessing my own, you know, the biology of my own ability to endure the profound suffering associated with trying to influence trying to influence dynamics that feel
pretty intractable a lot of the time.
And, you know, and what that all looks like spiritually ontologically, however, one chooses to conceive it.
And that, you know, and that is that is also very present in my psychology with this.
There is kind of this, I would say that the the biggest impairment to any kind of sense of to, you know, the biggest impairment of my psychological and physical health is a sense of powerlessness.
But, but, you know, I am all about the fatalistic determination and all that.
Odin writes out rides out to fight the the Fenris wolf who will devour the sun and bring about the end of the world, even though the the serious has already told him that he will fail in that endeavor and all that good stuff.
But, you know, but what I what I really feel like is that this sort of like fatalistic drive to keep going and keep trying to figure out is really just there's an element of it that's quite easy because it's so much motivated by curiosity at the same time
that I just feel I feel like the more work that I do, I know that I should just stop talking about this book until it's done, which I really do think is the summer solstice, but I've been going back and adding more like fleshing out.
I'm still really relying on a lot of what I wrote, but I'm fleshing it all out, giving it this kind of overarching narrative structure in a bunch of political examples and something that just keeps coming up over and over and over again.
Not that I haven't said this before, but it's becoming such a central thesis for me is just that so much of how we conceive of this stuff and how we conceive of our responses are just fucking morality tales, you know, they're just and
they're morality tales with their different morality tales, you know, every everything is going to be okay and everything is hopeless that neither of those are really a function of integrated strategic thought neither of those are a coherent assessment of all the variables that there are to assess.
And it's just so interesting to keep looking at all of these different dynamics that pervade our lives and all of these conceivable methodologies for approaching shifting those variables.
That we just haven't really like inhabited before employed before and so you know it's a lot of the time I feel very much beyond hope or despair might be like a little more of a grandiose phrasing that is totally appropriate.
But I do feel a little bit like I don't know if there's hope, but here's all the flaws in everything that we've done so far. And here's all the alternatives to what we've done so far. And that's pretty interesting.
You know, and, and really, really like maybe, maybe the weird story that it feels like we're in right now is that as we all become more sophisticated consumers of information and you know, like there's a lot of bad exponential curves happening like atmospheric carbon dioxide and things like that but
scientific publishing is still on an exponential curve and we really are learning more and understanding more. And it's almost like the the weird, the weird reality that I could see us tending toward that wouldn't really register in the hope despair binary morality
tales would be this one in which we get to this point where we actually really do see with painfully perfect clarity, a way that we could have one but everybody's too demoralized and demobilized to give it a shot.
You know, I don't know, maybe I'm not saying that's something I specifically predict but I'm just pointing out that there's a there's a world of weird possibilities to examine that our emotions can really hinder us from being able to see one of one of the ways I see that playing out is something
I'm reminded when I see people kind of assessing this current moment and processing or failing to process their fear about it and all that I'm reminded of this quote from Barbara Tushman's amazing book The Guns of August
Dead battles like dead generals hold the military mind in their dead grip and Germans know less than other peoples prepare for the last war, prepare for the war that happened before the war there actually in now.
I can't quote this book without a brief historical digression I just think it's so interesting.
God, I've made so many podcasts at this point. Sometimes I sometimes I find myself in these moments worrying that I've already said this book whatever you can say, which is that you and I might be alive today because Barbara Tushman wrote that book about World War One Kennedy supposedly cited it in his cabinet meetings during the Cuban Missile Christmas.
Because you know, Tushman was talking about how the officers on both sides in World War One made policy based on the story they were all living in that they had learned at Military Academy.
And that was all based on past lessons from past wars and warfare had mechanized and those lessons just didn't apply anymore.
And you know, they were kind of morality tales on a lot of cases rather than coherent strategic assessments to begin with, even if you were applying them to the last war.
But the point that I was actually making is that I see something similar. I see us preparing for the last war a little bit also.
So, you know, in addition to obviously this is not the sole cause of our paralysis or anything like this, but in addition to all the other reasons that we are experiencing such an incapacity like such a lack of agency about pretty much every damn thing.
I think a lot of the time as we're fretting over what's happening now and wondering what's going to happen, we're kind of thinking something roughly akin to, okay, so when is this going to be exactly like Germany in 1936?
When is the thing that's precisely akin to the invasion of Poland going to happen? That sort of thing.
And I'm not even saying, again, this is not, let's talk about strategy rather than traffic and morality tales. I'm not saying that this is going to be better than that.
Worse seems eminently plausible, but it almost certainly is going to be different than anything that's come before.
And there's a whole bunch of reasons for that. And it's kind of interesting to actually dive into, you know, to like really grind on just like a little bit of historic analysis from, you know, these sort of pivotal political moments that seem to still kind of inform our current mythologies very heavily.
So I read The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich, I don't know, you know, a year or two ago.
And I really have to say, there was no, I thought about pulling a quote out to illustrate this point, but it's really not the kind of thing, there's not some like decisive passage that really conveys this.
It's a, you know, I mean, it's a like a thousand page book or something.
And it's something you get a sense of very cumulatively as you just get all of this historic political detail.
But at some point it becomes clear that Hitler invading Russia, well, two things that Hitler succeeding in occupying Czechoslovakia and Poland was, it was not because of any competence on his part.
It really required, you know, if this sounds familiar, let me know.
But Liberals really just kind of let him do that shit and Austria.
But what becomes so strikingly clear is just what a terrible idea it was for him to invade Russia.
And I guess the quotes I could have pulled out is that there were a bunch of generals and stuff around him, you know, trying to tell him that without impinging upon his delicate sensibilities about his own singular genius and all that good stuff.
And yeah, it's just, it's like we have, I think that a lot of people, even if they're very skeptical of our national mythologies, might sort of take more seriously than they should.
This particular mythology that like the world was threatened by the Third Reich and it was, you know, we were up against the wall and the odds were against us, but miraculously we managed to fight that regime off and win.
And it's just not true.
It's like the moment that he invaded Russia.
It was just over.
And I think that the United States entering World War II probably had a lot more to do, honestly, with realizing that Bolsheviks were going to, you know, that the Soviet Union was going to become extremely powerful as a result and wanting to curtail that.
But there is, you know, so obviously what I'm saying is like these people tend historically to make really crazy, stupid mistakes.
And the big difference between then and now is that the people, the despots whose rule we are currently subject to are honestly like way more crazy and stupid than people in historical authoritarian contexts.
If we were looking for an analog to what is happening right now, you know, if we're looking for something that's actually like pretty close in time and in terms of material circumstances in some ways at least to what is happening right now with the American power structure,
we could actually do a lot worse than to look at the coalitional provisional authority in the Bush administration's occupation of Iraq.
And something I think I've probably mentioned a number of times, a sort of like, I don't know is it a genre, but a kind of work that I just take great delight in reading or watching or consuming in any format.
Is anything that focuses less on how immoral and terrible systems of coercive power are and emphasizes more how just insanely stupid they are.
And in fact, I have to I'm just going to shout out this media project because it's so amazing and it's bringing this kind of stuff brings me great joy when the authoritarian nightmare we're living in is causing me a lot of pain.
So there is a YouTube channel by this guy Adam something, I think which which is also just for just to be even more massively digressive.
I also have an affinity for because my punk name was when my name was Scott was Scott something.
But Adam something I have described as seeing like a state but in 10 minute intervals on YouTube.
But it's, you know, it's just like a lot of great I think he has like an urban planning degree or something like that.
It's a lot of great takes on vanity mega construction projects from authoritarian regimes.
And it's just amazing.
Okay, anyway, but another thing that is in that genre that I read, you know, I'm going to say with great pleasure and laughing a lot, acknowledging that the actual invasion of Iraq at the time that it was happening caused me tremendous pain.
But there's this book Imperial Life in the Emerald City inside Iraq's Green Zone by Rajiv Shandrasakharan.
And it's just full, you know, it's just like one of these amazing stories of how much that really was their game to lose and how much their ideology and the sort of, you know, the authoritarian the Hall of Mirrors.
How much the Hall of Mirrors that is fairly intrinsic to the psychology and overall dynamics of technocratic regimes in general, but then certainly like hyper authoritarian technocratic regimes in particular.
You basically have two strikes against you for comprehension of what's happening around you at that point.
Right, because that's that's two strikes against you, your ability to comprehend the world the authoritarian temperament as we've been covering in this podcast since its inception, very, very antithetical to, you know, the dominance versus comprehension
syndrome, as I sometimes call what other scientists call the domestication syndrome.
So you got that and then the hyper schematic reductive worldview, the sort of unintegrated brain dynamics with the left brain hemisphere, overruling the direct sensory input and, you know, capacity for comprehending complexity that the right brain offers,
you know, where they work so well together and don't very don't function very well in isolation, you know, those are two major major impediments towards understanding anything.
So technocratic authoritarian regimes tend to have absolutely no idea what is happening around them. That doesn't mean they don't succeed in hurting people, but it does mean that they are that they generate crises for themselves.
While they are also generating crises for us in the earth and all that.
And yeah, so this book, Imperial Life in the Emerald City is just this great description of, you know, a bunch of particular instances of that but it's, it's very, very similar to what's happening now domestically.
So the Bush administration didn't fire a bunch of career diplomats and technocrats and, you know, military personnel and things like that over ideological reasons.
They very much left the kind of this underlying substrate that the deep state apparatus or whatever in place, but they totally, totally did what is happening now in the federal government, they completely did that with the
that governed Iraq after their invasion and really anything could have happened. But what did happen was that they appointed all these ideologues who just had no idea, like who didn't, you know, for instance, speak Arabic right they fired a bunch of career diplomats and technocrats who had spent their
whole lives doing things like working on reconstruction plans and, you know, studying post invasion literature and certainly those people are lost in their own labyrinth to some extent but it's like they definitely had a basic comprehension of the situation that the people they were
replaced with or usurped by, you know, whether they would have naturally had the role but it was given to somebody else and these people just totally lacked.
And he, I'll just give one very quick example. He talks about this guy Bernard Carrick, who used to be like a police commissioner in New York City super tied in with like Giuliani and the whole like Republican, you know, the Republican apparatus or whatever.
And he talks about, he talks about the guy who was this State Department expert in international law enforcement, who was kind of not exactly being replaced by Carrick but, you know, was there to introduce him to everybody and try to, you know, integrate him into some version who
basically was the person who would have been natural for the role. And in this chapter called Who Are These People describes this guy meeting Bernard Carrick and realizing that he just literally hasn't read any of the briefings or anything that has been given to him and that he's just kind of there to, in his own words, do his own thing.
And at some point they're in an office and it says, the CPA's Interior Ministry team shared a modest office in the palace with American advisors working with the Justice Ministry. They often brought in Iraqi judges along with interpreters for meetings.
Bob, who are these people Carrick asked Gifford one day? Who the fuck are these people?
Oh, those are Iraqis, Gifford replied. What the fuck are they doing here?
Bernie, that's the reason we're here, right? Like, like that level of just sort of total disconnection from reality kind of stuff. And so that went exactly how it went.
And then the first Trump administration was also very much, his actions were heavily, heavily constrained by this sort of, you know, enduring this apparatus of state administration that endures any given election cycle or whatever.
So this is from Bob Woodward's book, Fear, Trump and the White House. And I'll just read a little bit of it. The only thing to know before I quote is that chorus is an acronym here for an agreement between the United States and South Korea that has economic aspects
and allows the United States military to have bases in South Korea and enable detection of intercontinental ballistic missiles being fired from North Korea to the United States.
And it's one of those things where, you know, before this guy came around, there was pretty much a consensus that that was something worth keeping around.
So Woodward says, despite almost daily reports of chaos and discord in the White House, the public did not know how bad the internal situation actually was.
Trump was always shifting, rarely fixed, erratic. He would get in a bad mood, something large or small would infuriate him, and he would say about the chorus trade agreement, we're withdrawing today.
But now there was the letter dated September 5th, 2017, a potential trigger to a national security catastrophe.
Cohn was worried Trump would sign the letter if he saw it.
Cohn removed the letter draft from the resolute desk. He placed it in a blue folder marked keep.
I stole it off his desk, he later told an associate. I wouldn't let him see it. He's never going to see that document, got to protect the country.
In the anarchy and disorder of the White House and Trump's mind, the president never noticed the missing letter.
Maybe it doesn't have quite the impact, but this is after so many pages of him repeatedly going on these tirades about how he needs somebody to draft him a decision memo withdrawing from this agreement.
But he just doesn't have the attention span to notice. As long as people agree to do it, he doesn't have the attention span to notice if the decision memo never actually shows up on his desk.
A little later he says, Cohn and Porter worked together to derail what they believed were Trump's most impulsive and dangerous orders.
That document and others like it just disappeared.
When Trump had a draft on his desk to proofread, Cohn at times would just yank it, and the president would forget about it.
But if it was on his desk, he'd sign it.
It's not what we did for the country, Cohn said privately. It's what we saved him from doing.
It was no less than an administrative coup d'etat in undermining of the will of the president of the United States and his constitutional authority.
And the book is amazing because there are just so many anecdotes like that.
It's like this comic refrain that just keeps surfacing over and over again.
And then the world was about to end.
And then somebody took the world ending decision memo off the man's desk.
So at the risk of overstating the very obvious, there aren't any people like that left anywhere in that structure anymore.
And that's bad, but it's also that crisis is opportunity.
That means that there's going to be chaos, and that means there's going to be possibility.
And I think the right way to understand this, obviously this is one of those things.
We have to speak in terms of psychology or we just can't understand the situation.
This isn't just like a question of authoritarian consolidation.
This isn't a question of ideological uniformity, which in a weird sense is not nearly clearly as present as temperamental uniformity in that administration and in the broader authoritarian movement, both here and around the world.
But the right framework for understanding this in, I think, has to do with the fact that...
Look, Hitler fought in World War One.
Like he was a crazy moron, but he had done things in his life that were actually hard where failure wasn't simply rewarded.
And the people who rule our lives now have been consistently rewarded for their incompetence, and it has been a developmental catastrophe.
This is something I will literally never understand about right-wing politics.
This is one of the most open, one of the most overt logical flaws, and the reasoning is that all this rhetoric about strength and all this stuff...
And it's like, well, if what you value is strength, then why do you want people to have power over everybody else who've never really had to endure any difficulty or do anything hard ever in their lives?
But this is very much something that this is an extraordinarily recurrent dynamic throughout history.
And the classic commentary on it was authored by this guy, Ibn Khaldun, in his work, The Mukaddimah, An Introduction to History, which was written in the 14th century.
And broadly speaking, to engage in a little reductionism, the cycle that Khaldun was trying to comprehend was just that nomadic pastoralists, people who were called by states, barbarians,
had this very reliable tendency to conquer and subjugate cities, sedentary, agricultural, more state-like hierarchies, every few generations or so.
And then they would set up shop, they would then become these very state societies that they had just imposed their rule on, and a few generations would go by.
And then somebody else would do the same thing to them. And he wanted to understand this, and you may very well see where this is going.
But I'm quoting here from Anthony Satine's Nomads, The Wanderers Who Shaped Our World, but he describes Khaldun describing these three phases that correspond to three generations.
And the only word to know here that wouldn't be familiar is asabaya, which means, broadly speaking, a sort of like group cohesion, solidarity, capacity for effective collective action.
So he says that, in a section entitled, dynasties have a natural lifespan like individuals. He traced what he saw as an inevitable arc.
One, the generation that establishes the dynasty has a toughness and savagery about it, and is held together by asabaya.
Two, once power and authority are established, the rot begins to set in as the second generation changed from the desert attitude to sedentary culture, from privation to luxury and plenty.
This separates the ruler from the rest of the group, which leads to the dissipation of the group feeling that made conquest possible in the first place.
The third generation, then, has completely forgotten the period of desert life and toughness, as if it had never existed.
They have lost the taste for the sweetness of fame and for group feeling. Luxury reaches its peak among them, because they are so much given to a life of prosperity and ease.
And Kaldun says, it is in the fourth generation that ancestral prestige is destroyed, that the downfall occurs.
And I would say that is precisely the territory we're in.
So, I mean, both these things are happening. There is very much an intensifying cult dynamic.
There is very little emphasis on anybody's capacity to actually achieve any objective or behave competently with respect to pretty much anything.
And way more of a question for somebody getting appointed to or fired from the current regime is whether they've made podcasts that say things that these people like to hear.
So, that's also very much where the Putin regime is at at this point. That is something that happens.
But the other thing that's happening is this sort of just behavioral dysregulation.
I mean, let me put it like this. I, like so many other people right now, have really been considering the extent to which I'm personally threatened currently.
And this has to be true. This has to be true.
Somewhere right this very moment, there is someone who is tasked with putting together some list or enacting some surveillance or, you know, drafting up some plan or whatever for some horrible act of repression,
who can't get it together to integrate the overwhelming glut of data that the federal government has at its disposal because they are like trying to emulate an alpha male influencer in their posts,
in their incessant posts on whatever social media platform they're addicted to, right? Like that kind of thing.
In addition to the ideological, the contraction of world views and the diminishment of competence based on real world experience, there's also just a lot of that kind of stuff going on more so than was the case before.
And so somebody's going to eat these guys, right? The question is who? But they will create crises for themselves that they maybe won't be able to endure any under any circumstances,
but that would be points of intervention to use a classic Turner phrase where anybody watching seriously assessing the situation and maybe even laying a little groundwork for an intervention ahead of time.
And again, I am not trafficking in morality tales here that are intended to just say like, hey, don't worry, everything's going to be okay or anything like that.
You know, for kind of like very different reasons, our dark overlords are less capable of coherent behavior than our dark overlords have been in the past,
but we are also less capable of coherent behavior and achieving any kind of, you know, exercising any kind of collective agency.
Both those things are true, you know, for different reasons. In their case, luxury, you know, everything we just talked about in our case, this chronic sense of powerlessness and subjugation has its own consequences.
But nonetheless, that is the story that I'm living in about this time, which is not so much, you know, we should take concerted action to rise up and stop this right now, although we should.
It's just not clear, you know, that that seems far more remote of a prospect than that there will be a crisis in this system that will be so profound that the opportunities it presents will be proportionally profound.
I'm just going to give literally one example of this, which is just that, as I've touched on at different points in this podcast, one of the sort of strategic paradigms that I have a lot of affinity for is the like retreat to the mountains to become capable of
returning to the city and fighting thing, you know, and that was that was a lot of the my notion of what forest defense could and should be when that was, you know, pretty much my whole life.
And it's, it's crazy how much for a variety of reasons in my own lifetime, I've seen it get harder and harder to live on the margins and to, you know, do stuff like land squatting and stuff like that that used to be somewhat plausible and that there used to be much larger and more
robust communities of people doing and enforcement isn't the only reason that that has become more difficult. But, you know, what with all of this gutting of federal personnel, it does seem and I don't know, maybe somebody knows more about this than I do,
you know, maybe there's some reason this isn't true, but it does seem a lot more like a serious prospect that people could maybe be some places on federal land, it probably still in like a kind of shifting manner but like set up some like real infrastructure and really not
necessarily have to leave and kind of just do, you know, whatever. And that's not I'm not saying, again, I am not trafficking in morality tales and I'm not trying to say hey guys everything's going to be okay because we just have to go to the forest and become an army and then come
defeat our overlords or anything like that, but I'm just pointing out that there that this shift that we're in right now feels terrible and does have a lot of, you know, a lot of tragic implications but that there really are significant
opportunities here. I sometimes quip that we were living, you know, to make two pop culture references that hopefully will be familiar to a sufficient number of people. We were living in don't look up, but now we're in the South Park
episode where America attacks Canada. And the thing about that is that in don't look up there was a sort of inexorable trajectory whereas in a South Park episode, anything can happen. I know that's that's very low brow but but but there it is right.
So yeah, I mean, there it is. That's that's my my little thesis I also did another if you want this with a little more neurobiology and whatnot. Although the the episodes of fight like an animal that talk about the stupidity of coercive power in some fashion or another
are indeed Legion, just to hype this obscure nascent little project that has never gotten nearly as much work put into it. There is a World Tree Center YouTube channel. And there there is a video called powerful idiots and collapse that looks at
some of the research on just like wealthy and powerful people in general, you know, from from the perspective of neurophysiology brain imaging studies and stuff like that, and how they they really do understand less about the world right
this isn't this isn't just some like awesome literary sort of like rhetoric, you know, this is real, this is real. And that's, that's got to, you know, let that hurt in the way that it hurts but also let that make you feel make you feel like doing
doing something in the way that it could like, like our enemies are weak and stupid. And you know, I've been kind of, but I'll, you know, so check that out if that sounds compelling. And little things I'm not going to go into a bunch, a bunch about like the work I've been doing recently
personally, but I, I have been I had to cancel one and so there's still a Sunday left, but I have been doing this little, you know, like teaching a class on Sundays here as much to present this material as to just get people together in person and talking about anything
that the classes have really varied in terms of that. Sometimes, you know, people have just kind of appreciated the presentation other times there's been like some real conversation, you know, and some like meeting new people and exchanging information
right that sort of thing. And I find that every time I do it like the experience itself is really it feels pretty straightforward I'm, you know, I'm talking about stuff I know well and I'm interested in it feels good and then I talk to people and it feels, you know,
compelling, but not like revelatory necessarily. And then I noticed that every time afterwards I feel this like real sense of animation like I feel, I feel hyped up. And I just literally think that it's, it's just that it's just that exercise of getting out and trying to get people together
in any fashion to talk about possibilities of any kind together. So yeah, you know, that's, that's my story. I also I'll just say even though I'm not really going to report back on it but I do want to make a another
tree worship revival episode because it has been a pretty fascinating process to sort of like go to the same place in the city every day. And in a very public way kind of, you know, build little shrines and engage in different forms of
ceremonialism. And it really does feel like it's kind of caught on I would say at this point there's like, five or six distinct, I don't know individuals or factions or whatever, who are doing similar things around the park and it feels
really cool, you know, so it's just, it's just a thing that is not giving up that I've really been enjoying and, and yeah, you know, actually gaining a fair amount of emotional sustenance from so yeah, that's, that's my my morality
tale isn't everything is going to be okay. My morality tale is that we don't know what opportunities are present unless we look, and it's worth trying to find out what's true about the world, and what's possible to do in it.
That's all for now. Like I said, this is just a little this is like an uncharacteristically non three hour long episode. And I'll be back with more if not imminently certainly after the summer solstice. No, I'll do something before the solstice that's a month away. Okay, friends.