Title: 51 What We Sang in the Mountains to Greet the Gentle Rain pt 2 Preview
Episode #: 51
Episode ID: 10663642
Source: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/10663642-51-what-we-sang-in-the-mountains-to-greet-the-gentle-rain-pt-2-preview.mp3
------------------------------------------------------------

=== EPISODE METADATA ===
Generated: 2026-01-12 01:02:06
Episode ID: 16176162
MP3 File: 16176162-embodied-politics.mp3
Title: Embodied Politics
Podcast/Artist: World Tree Center for Evolutionary Politics
Album/Series: Fight Like An Animal
Source URL: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/16176162-embodied-politics.mp3
========================
What if we had complete freedom to test new body invasive technologies on real people?
Since the dawn of science, direct technology testing on real individuals has been an ethical
nightmare. This was a problem for ancient physicists and doctors, and it's now a problem for modern
scientists. However, this doesn't seem like it's going to be a problem for Elon Musk.
Apparently having things, finding things inside their bodies like implants and bits of technology.
What if we had complete freedom to test new body invasive technologies on real people?
Substance dualism comes from that there are two different many other ways, but just to kind of
summarize what the problem is that he sets up is he argues that the human person is essentially
these two different substances, two very different substances, completely different
substances, which is where the term substance dualism comes from, that there are two different
kinds of substances. One is a mental substance and the other is a physical substance. And these
two kinds of substances we make a lot of mess. Of course, there are two very different kinds of
things, so a lot of resistance, resistance, how can we use two very different substances to
test new body invasive technologies on real people? We don't understand how at all.
Greetings friends, I'm Arnold Schroeder and this is Fight Like an Animal.
Find episode bibliographies and other texts at againsttheinternet.com. And if you'd like to
support this work materially, please check out patreon.com slash biological singularity.
Well, my beautiful friends, this episode marks the return, my return to somewhat regular
podcasting, which is to say that it marks my departure from a phase of obsessive consumption
with writing a book, which is more or less finished at this point. I'm doing things like
writing footnotes and making figures to illustrate some of my points graphically and
things like that. And it will go out to beta readers soon. The experience of writing this
book was one instance of a type of experience that I've had a number of, which I make the
analogy that writing a bicycle really isn't actually very great practice for say running
a marathon or whatever, much as it might seem like it would be. In a number of cases, I've
developed some skill or had some routine practice that I thought essentially totally
prepared me for some other skill or practice, something that seemed like it would translate
readily. When I began making this podcast, I'd spent so much time talking to groups doing various
kinds of trainings, talking about this very material in so many different ways that I
thought recording podcasts would be effortless, but I actually had to spend like a month just
sort of finding my voice feeling very awkwardly at first like a guy talking alone in a room
into a MacBook Pro, which in fact I was, but it really took some work to adapt to the very specific
context in which I was trying to employ these general abilities. I thought that all this time I
spent podcasting would translate essentially effortlessly and directly into writing a book
and it just didn't. It just did not. And so for the last couple years, this has been going
on for a long time now. I've been working on drafts and realizing that there's something that
just isn't quite there, that it's not just a matter of doing some editing, that there's something I
really do lack and essentially realizing that I'm in yet another one of these sort of
developmental processes that I'm learning how to write books. And that, I would say that I
accepted that pretty early on and made my peace with it. But then as it continued, it definitely
became, I don't know, it wasn't frightening, but it certainly wasn't convenient or particularly
pleasant. I would say that as the experience progressed, it intensified and that I tended
increasingly to jettison more and more of my other endeavors and to podcast less and less,
but to really just focus less and less on any other aspect of life. And I think cumulatively,
I probably wrote five or six hundred thousand words that I simply threw away that are just
utterly discarded. And of course, there have been some other major detours. And I am going to talk
more about just kind of some of like the broader vision that I have for projects emerging from
this project going forward after I read you the introductory chapter to the manuscript,
which I now have more or less finished, that I feel pretty good about. It's going to be a fairly
short episode that this chapter is, like I said, just a brief introductory sort of framing exercise.
But yeah, I suppose that in the movie about my life, which is always playing in my head,
the moment did finally come where the dramatic music started playing and I
finally really just understood how to do what I was trying to do this whole time.
And now as it seems to be the case with virtually everything I do, while I'm obviously going to
seek feedback from people and try to incorporate it, I do have a little bit of a sense of,
you know, there's there's nothing that can now invalidate the fact that what I've written is
fundamentally what I was trying to write. Maybe it's good, maybe it's bad, maybe people like it
and understand it, maybe they won't. But it's what I was trying to do. And so I'm only going to release
this one chapter as a podcast. And then I'm going I'm going to pursue, you know, some kind of
whether I try to publish it externally or whether I self publish it, it's going to be a book for
a while. And then at some point in audiobook, and I don't exactly know, I mean, all that'll
depend on variables that have yet to be discerned, like what what format where it's released at what
times. But yeah, I want to present this first introductory framing chapter as a precursor to
a fully realized, fully developed kind of classic, we massively entangled fight like an animal podcast
that I have coming out sometime quite soon as well. And then, like I said, after the reading of this
chapter, I will use this abbreviated episode to just talk a little bit about the future of
these projects. Revolutionary biology embodied politics for global survival.
Chapter one. The world is dying and so are our stories about saving it. A philosophical outlook
is the very foundation of thought and life, the sort of ideas we attend to, and the sort of ideas
which we push into the negligible background govern our hopes, our fears, our control of behavior
as we think we live. This is why the assemblage of philosophic ideas is more than a
specialist study. It molds our type of civilization. Alfred North Whitehead.
All of our existing political paradigms have failed. Whatever other merits they possess,
all existing traditions, classical liberalism, anarcho primitivism, authoritarian Marxism,
and everything else have failed to halt the destruction of the world. Because of how
far beyond planetary thresholds we find ourselves, this failure is decisive and empirical.
Ecological reality is unique in its finitude. We could endure a thousand years of subjugation
and still claim a politics of liberation was on its slow path to victory. We cannot endure
a thousand more years of clear cuts and tar sands mining and claim a politics of survival
is doing anything but failing. What has already transpired is beyond endurance.
Survival is now contingent on our ability to undo what the world destroyers have already done
before runaway processes of global change progress too far. We do not know if such a
thing is possible, but it is quite clear that the only way to find out is to take power away
from those who currently wield it. If I wanted to write a book about how our politics are working
and all we need to do is commit to them even more, I could. I have certainly experienced many
victories, at least at the scale of, say, stopping a logging operation or the construction of a coal
export dock. And our limited successes can create attachments. Our direct actions against
fossil fuel infrastructure feel promising if only the police would stop brutalizing and caging us.
Our attempts to build a robust local economy seem like they have real potential
if only people weren't so exhausted and miserable from working all the time in the other economy
to survive. This is perfectly valid and at a certain point perfectly irrelevant.
If a paradigm's only shortcoming is that it failed because not enough people participated
or it was brutally suppressed or for any other reason, this still constitutes failure.
For instance, I am greatly inspired by the ephemeral anarchist society
which was created during the Spanish Revolution in 1936. The only reason this society
failed was that fascists and authoritarian communists defeated the anarchists with military force.
And the only reason for this military defeat was that these factions were armed respectively by
Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union. It was a heartbreakingly beautiful attempt to create
another version of human society. And it taught us much, but it didn't work because of the
same kind of intervention that has crushed so many beautiful dreams. If the only problem
with the politics is that people with other politics keep killing and caging those who
practice it, that's still a problem. At this stage of the ecological crisis,
what's most striking is the massive variability of our responses to it. In the developmental
context of contemporary civilization, it has become quite clear that a relatively small subset of
human minds are attuned to ecological reality. From the vast majority of cultural expression
and public dialogue, one would have no idea the habitability of the planet is rapidly and
palpably declining. But it might also be true that our responses occurring below the
threshold of conscious acknowledgement. For all our silence about it, there is a remarkable
synchrony of ecological crisis and a general pessimism about the future. A very widespread
sense exists that all of the various paradigms for organizing human existence have proven
viable, and therefore a collapse of some kind is inevitable. One must note, however,
a curious stasis in these paradigms. In a relatively short time, as human societies
underwent massive reorganization, a handful of major political tendencies were established.
The essential theoretical frameworks of liberalism and the many variants of socialism,
such as communism and anarchism, were all articulated in the course of less than two centuries.
No fundamentally new stories about how to affect political outcomes have been birthed since that
time. Of course, important refinements have been made since then, but that's exactly what they are.
Refinements. The essentials of long-established political theories persist,
while a dizzying torrent of new insights, both in the form of scientific research
and in the form of the empirical realities of social change, remain unaccounted for.
One does not find anarchist theory based on recent insights into the brain structure
correlates of political orientation, nor Marxist theory addressing how people in
complex societies increasingly define themselves through the niche self-expression the internet
enables. We can often discern the existence of a worldview's underlying and unarticulated
psychological framework by covariation. If a particular way of seeing the world is correlated
with logically unrelated traits, we can begin to explore where, ultimately, that way of seeing
comes from. One such set of correlations is between perceptions of egalitarianism and
hierarchy on the one hand, questions of which essentially define so many political traditions,
and perceptions of novelty versus familiarity, stimulation versus security, innovation versus
tradition. This correlation is evident in our vocabulary with conservative, simultaneously denoting
someone who resists change and supports hierarchy and progressive, conversely denoting someone who
supports change and resists hierarchy. When we place various political traditions on a single axis
combining both these elements, stability and hierarchy versus change and equality, we find
that they are all frozen in time. The distinction between them is how long ago they froze.
Authoritarian politics, in so many of its essential features, recapitulates the social
organization and explicit ideology of antiquity and the middle ages. This is easy to see in its
more religious formulations, where texts like the Old Testament, much of which dates from
the Bronze Age, are cited as a basis for organizing a society. This is a truly radical
adherence to archaic doctrine and, accordingly, a truly radical disavowal of the integration of
more contemporary observations into a worldview. Liberalism, however, essentially deviates from
authoritarianism in the antiquity of the sacred parchments it cites. Its ancient scrolls can
be dated in mere centuries rather than millennia. Rather than recapitulating antiquity and the
Middle Ages, liberalism recapitulates, generally quite explicitly, the Enlightenment. It thus
relies on a core theoretical foundation of humanity's undifferentiated, disembodied
rationality, the signature conviction of that age, which is utterly contradicted by a mass
of converging results across a wide range of scientific disciplines. Likewise, liberalism
invokes documents like the United States Constitution, a document which, unlike the Bible,
contains no instructions on where to place one's burnt offerings to Yahweh, nor on how the female
inhabitants of a city should be divided up in order to be raped by the conquerors,
but which was written well before, say, the development of electronic surveillance or
nuclear power, and thus of dubious utility in answering questions related to such matters.
One of the most profound frustrations of my life in ecological politics
has been the inability of liberals in the United States to understand that
even in the highly counterfactual world where a meaningful climate policy somehow emerged from
extant political institutions, the Supreme Court would simply negate it, which is to say that
nine people, with no scientific training whatsoever, would put on some ritual robes and
consult their ancient parchment, inscribed with its sacred calligraphy before anyone had to worry about,
say, the quantity of methane under the world's melting permafrost, and on this basis declare
any serious effort at survival unconstitutional. They wouldn't even necessarily be wrong.
It's an inherent peril in organizing a society on guidelines that predate
all the defining features of that society. Authoritarianism and liberalism exhaust the
range of ideologies associated with institutional power in the vast majority of the world's
societies, and while adherents of either doctrine may truly feel radically at odds,
these two political tendencies have far more in common with one another than either has with
egalitarianism. The distinctions between them are distinctions of degree. Authoritarianism
posits a society in which a single person or a tiny cadre maintain power while liberalism expands
the realm of political influence to the minority of a society's populace at the top of an
economic hierarchy. Historically, this might have consisted of, say, the entire aristocracy,
or a little later in history, all landowners, and in its contemporary formulations, it's the tiny
minority with enough money to influence institutional decision making. Egalitarianism, in contrast,
posits a society in which no minority, whether a single individual or a small class,
exercises control over everyone else. In addition to decision making power per se,
economically, authoritarianism and liberalism's distinctions are a matter of scale. All land
and resources are monopolized with violence, placing the vast majority of the population
in a position of dependent subordination. The question is, by how many people?
Egalitarianism, in contrast, posits a society in which the world is not owned. Individuals simply
get to inhabit it without paying someone to do so, and have direct access to a means of subsistence,
the means of production in a certain well-worn parlance. So if perceptions of hierarchy
and tolerance of change are correlated, we could imagine that egalitarian political tendencies,
like anarchism and communism, for all their myriad substantive differences, would transcend the
failure to integrate new insights characteristic of authoritarianism and liberalism.
But in very important ways, they do not. While liberalism recapitulates the Enlightenment,
the theoretical fundamentals of egalitarian political tendencies
feel very distinctly frozen in the 19th and perhaps the early 20th centuries.
This is evident in something that is difficult to rigorously document, but quite familiar to
anyone who has spent time in such political circles, which is the historic inflection
to a great deal of the discourse. Obsessions with, say, disputes that occurred during the
First International, or with ways of classifying different echelons of society that were developed
during the process of industrialization, are abundantly evident. More importantly,
the fundamental conceptualizations of human nature, the range of conceivable societies
which could emerge out of humanity's behavioral plasticity and the conditions which might elicit
a given human potential, are distinctly archaic. From monarchism to anarchism,
a shared unwillingness to confront uncertainty and adapt to change is evident. This is
occasionally made explicit, as when Chomsky asserts that anarchism is properly to be
regarded as the inheritor of the liberal ideals of the Enlightenment. He is speaking
broadly of the Enlightenment's search for a means of realizing humanity's maximum potential.
Unfortunately, however, the statement also applies to the Enlightenment notion of
disembodied rationality, where the human capacity to evaluate and adapt behavior
is seen as opposed to, rather than an expression of, our embodied animal nature.
Thus, just as John Locke, the so-called father of liberalism, spoke of humanity as a blank slate,
a tabula rasa. Foundational thinkers in the various schools of egalitarian political thought
have likewise insisted on drawing a line between biology and rationality, animal and human,
nature and nurture. No such line exists, and this conception is not simply wrong,
but incoherent. Because this incoherence occurs in the very foundations of the dominant forms
of political reasoning, it is unsurprising that the various extant political theories
have failed to make sense of the world, or accurately predict its trajectory,
say nothing of allowing us to reshape it. If the reader is anything like me,
she may be skeptical that this conceptual error, however foundational, is really all that
consequential. For the majority of my political life, I concerned myself with far more immediate
vagaries of political power and far more concrete outcomes. Most of the time, when we engage in
political conflict, we do not speak, not explicitly in any case, about our most fundamental
conceptions of the world. But all too often, the fundamental conceptions we do not speak of
exert an influence on us, which is all the more consequential precisely because we are not
conscious of it. In other words, our core narratives operate as a frame in the cognitive
science sense of the term, a mental structure operating in the background which excludes
some aspects of reality from consideration while highlighting others.
I have written zoning proposals, decommissioned logging roads, and blockaded oil trains. I have
helped shut down oil pipelines, occupied ports, and filed administrative challenges to public
lands timber sales. I have crafted proposals for new municipal government bureaus. I have
participated in uprisings I really thought might become revolutions. I have endured the
chronic surveillance of federal law enforcement. If I wanted to adopt the style of a memoir, I might
add that I have had religious experiences facing off with riot police, felt like the smoke of the
burning barricades was carrying me into the sky, and loved with the delirious intensity of a
nomadic revolutionary who finds, for a while, a companion in travel. The point, of course,
is that I have exerted tremendous energy and effort attempting to alter our world-killing
trajectory, and I am absolutely certain that these efforts failed because the movements in
which I participated lacked a politics with coherent biological foundations.
Let us distinguish between necessary and sufficient conditions. I do not claim that
these missing biological foundations would guarantee success, only that they are badly needed,
that we are guaranteed failure without them. Time and again, in ways I never could have
anticipated, the false assumptions about human behavior at the core of so much political thinking
somehow cascaded through more immediate deliberations wreaking havoc on concrete
efforts to create projects of ecological survival. Still, I did not stop my full-time
efforts at disrupting the industrial economy until the fall of 2017, when I concluded
that the Earth's climate system was almost certainly beyond tipping points. This had
seemed merely probable before. This experience was intensely painful, but also opened my eyes
to new worlds of possibility. The decisive sense of failure and the psychological reorganization
it necessarily implied gave me an opportunity to reflect on the catastrophic impact of
biophobia on our politics, and correspondingly the tremendous opportunities that conceptual
integration would offer. The fundamental questions any politics attempts to answer are all biological
ones. What is the range of possible human behavior, and thus the range of possible social
forms? What is the source of the plasticity of our behavior and societies, and what
circumstances would stimuli elicit a given human potential out of the myriad potentials we possess?
On what terms, and by what means, can we identify social outcomes which are more or less conducive
to human well-being, which maximize our prospects of self-realization and allow for
the fullest expression of the human spirit? Theories of political change are, ultimately,
theories of ways human behavior might change when subject to various influences. Any theory about
behavior and its sources, forms, and degree of variability is inherently biological. Thus,
a politics emerging from coherently integrated biological foundations would, in my estimation,
constitute a truly meaningful departure from tradition, a qualitatively new way of seeing
the world and attempting to affect it. This politics would be easily as different, arguably
considerably more so than, say, communism is from liberalism or liberalism from monarchism.
I will refer to this paradigm as revolutionary biology or embodied politics throughout this book.
Let us divest ourselves of the need for stories which sacrifice truth and service of psychological
comfort and articulate these coherently integrated biological foundations. Let us make war on fear
and face the processes of global annihilation to which we are now subject with comprehension.
Okay, so no huge plot twists or anything here for anyone who is broadly familiar with what
I've been doing on this podcast, but I do think that I've gotten considerably better at writing
fairly compact and reasonably impactful summaries of the material, the core
theses that I've been articulating here in a much more kind of wandering and deliriously eager
to engage in all manner of academic obscurity's way for these past four or five years, whatever it's
been. And I will go ahead and confess that one of the essential things that I did when I finally
got to this place of writing something I was satisfied with was to break my work up into
considerably smaller sub-components than I had been thinking of it as before. So
the one book that I was initially writing, I've broken up into three. So this thing that I'm done
with revolutionary biology embodied politics for global survival covers the material I've
gone into in this podcast essentially about transcending the nature and nurture binary and how
that binary is very much reflected in the logic of all of the political traditions that we still
work in, whether or not we explicitly say so, even if we're too sophisticated to use that kind
of language, and that a biology that really directly engages with how a politics that
really engages with how biology creates plasticity and what that implies for trying to elicit one
behavioral potential over another is like a radical departure from everything we've done in the past
and talking about how people fundamentally vary and if politics is about power dynamics between
groups you need to know what actual groups exist and if you're unwilling to acknowledge
biological differences between people you'll never get there stuff like that. But at some point or
admittedly I've already started on these two other books a war for comprehension is kind of my
sweeping narrative about human evolution and prehistory the age of fracture is my book about
now and the sort of like dynamics of hyper differentiation you know of intensifying biological
differentiation as a result of social role specialization that are massively complicating
and impairing our ability to respond you know to affect any kind of collective action or
respond to any collective action problems now and then to further darken this dark confession
I am also working on another book length manuscripts in parallel with these other two
that I don't really think of as a book I think of as a policy document because it's modeled on
and I kind of really want to explicitly emulate the aesthetics of you know environmental policy
documents as extant institutions of power tend to put them out but yeah here is where I get into
kind of like the future of this project finishing this up this particular manuscript and gaining
this sense that I sort of like know how to write books now with this a concomitant feeling that I
can kind of actually finally do it in parallel with other things rather than you know needing to
just sort of divest myself of any other stimuli or endeavors I yeah I feel like I can kind of
like put a lot more energy into projects that have emerged in the course of this podcast
but that I haven't really given like a ton of effort to in quite a while and so one of those
is something that I guess I initially brought up in the course of talking about the World Tree
Center for Evolutionary Politics which right now is basically a discord server a not totally
inactive one but you know it is not really an entity that is like churning out a bunch of concrete
work in any clear sense but you know like one of the projects that I wanted to
sort of do in that context was this this thing I've been trying to do forever of creating
like a parallel it's not even really a Portland climate plan but a sort of you know a proposal
for an ecologically integrated economy and way of life but again you know very much within the
sort of like language and aesthetics of environmental policy and planning documents in general
that extent political institutions put out and so that's this huge amount of work that I feel
really drawn to now it feels like I've just really seriously been wanting to do this for
well it really has been more than a decade and it is time and so I you know I want to
kind of just I guess like reorient people's attention to or mention again something that
has never ceased to be true but that I certainly haven't been clamoring to the highest rooftop to
scream at the top of my lungs anytime recently which is that you know that that structure the
World Tree Center still exists and I am very interested in having people get in touch with
me to help with certain projects and that is one of them I concretely could very much use a
research assistant you'd have discretion to you know pursue whatever policy documents or
research or whatever you thought would be helpful or interesting to make notes on but you know
I would be trying to convince somebody to also read some stuff that I would point out
to highlight relevant passages to make summaries of it and to help me incorporate it into
our own documents and this would basically be it's not supposed to be a
technical vision that nobody has ever achieved before it's supposed to be a concrete and
spatially explicit like locally specific instantiation of a lot of technical visions
that other people have right so instead of saying oh it takes 0.13 hectares to feed a given
individual for a year on a particular diet it's looking around in the place that I personally
actually live and saying where well where are those 0.13 hectares for all the people who
live around here right things like that it's you know it's instead of saying oh you can
cultivate algae for biofuel by using you know bioreactors that have a light penetration depth of
you know 1.6 centimeters whatever of saying like okay well where do we have storage tanks
here in Portland where this biofuel could go and and where do we have a waste stream from
which we could produce you know reactors that could grow this algae even in winter there's
things like that right and I guess I would also mention it would be quite interesting to have
somebody with video editing experience maybe who actually did that in some capacity or another
professionally or otherwise to well you know there's a huge range of of different
sort of projects that have different degrees of commitment and intensity to them
ranging from seriously putting up existing fight like an animal episodes on YouTube with
a little bit of video overlaying over them to adapting some of this work that has been happening
and future projects to some kind of video format I did some of it I really like threw myself into
the ring and taught myself video editing and made exactly one episode of a series that we were
calling root causes that were like it's just supposed to be these like punchy you know compact
impactful expositions of core theses of the project and I actually thought it was pretty
decently done in terms of the script and I found that I really like to write in that format and
I don't know what I'm basically saying like I thought I did a pretty good job but it definitely
had a vibe of like baby's first video editing and I spent so much time on it and I really
just saw this world in which the proliferating contingencies of video editing you know just
like the endless sort of morass of work that that entailed would really take me away from other stuff
but I still kind of want to do some of those projects so if you are somebody who wants to
make videos please also do get in touch and just generally speaking the invitation to world
trees still applies there's been some interesting stuff that's happened as a result of it I
certainly have read a number of papers that I wouldn't have otherwise if people on the world
tree discord server hadn't brought them to my attention we're not really in a place of having
meetings right now but I am happy to personally just talk one-on-one to anybody who wants to
help out in any capacity either with the particular things I just mentioned or
you know if you just want an invitation to the server to come check it out and see
what it's all about please do get in touch if you talk to me at some point about beta reading
this manuscript especially if it was a while ago there is just a very very good possibility that
I lost track of that conversation I do have a list on my whiteboard of current beta readers
that I'm fairly certain of or that I can remember but if you are interested in doing that
right it's really regardless of whether or not we've ever had a conversation about it before
now would be the time to get in touch either again or for the first time I am trying to gather all
the feedback that I'm going to try to integrate by early in the beginning of 2025 okay friends
very soon I will have an episode called revolutionary mythology which kind of ties in
with our previous episode how to tell if someone is hitting you as well as the
patreon episode from the not too distant past patrolling the wasteland give me like a week
at most until then thanks so much for listening and we will talk again soon
created and this soul substance was in some ways just kind of a separate thing infused into this
otherwise just purely mechanical world what if we had complete freedom to test new body invasive
technologies on real people mechanical world purely mechanical world purely mechanical world
purely mechanical world