Title: 52 Varieties of Scientific Revolution pt 2
Episode #: 52
Episode ID: 10728802
Source: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/10728802-52-varieties-of-scientific-revolution-pt-2.mp3
------------------------------------------------------------

=== EPISODE METADATA ===
Generated: 2026-01-12 01:02:06
Episode ID: 16144291
MP3 File: 16144291-primitive-permaculture-interview-with-david-lauterwasser.mp3
Title: Primitive Permaculture: Interview with David Lauterwasser
Podcast/Artist: World Tree Center for Evolutionary Politics
Album/Series: Fight Like An Animal
Source URL: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/16144291-primitive-permaculture-interview-with-david-lauterwasser.mp3
========================
Let us, in turn, be the spring that brings green new life to the grey terrain of death.
And with the blood we gave for justice, let us, after long nights full of sleepless terror, give birth to new days of beauty.
Greetings, friends. I'm Arnold Schroeder, and this is Fight Like an Animal.
This episode consists of an interview with David Lauterwasser of the Fernfuh Permaculture Project and the Anonymous Ramblings blog.
And I want to go ahead and just take a moment to publicly apologize to David for the fact that this conversation took place,
I really want to say, like six months ago, and the tunnel vision associated with me trying to complete this book project that consumed so much of my life
precluded me from releasing it any sooner, I guess, is about as good of an excuse as I've got.
And then apologize to all of you for the fact that this conversation just kind of starts.
There's no introductory phase, as one would expect, because I always try to, you know, examine the experiential foundations of people's world views and life's work.
And we, David and I both decided that we just kind of spent too long talking about the trajectory of his life up to the point of the projects he's now doing.
I spent a while thinking about ways I might creatively edit out portions or whatever, another factor that complicated me getting this out any sooner.
But in the end, decided to simply excise a solid hour and a half of the conversation.
So I guess cue some transition music, and then we just sort of start talking.
It's always been true that my politics have been very parallel to or overlapping with those of people who describe themselves as anarcho-primitivists,
but often times since I was exposed to it in the sort of like burgeoning form it took in the late 90s, early 2000s on the West Coast,
in the Earth First scene and the Green Anarchist scene out here, was that people were very much like, we draw the line at planting a seed,
ever under any circumstances, right? And if you're doing that, then it's civilization, you know?
And that always really, that always bummed me out, you know, I was always, and so I think that a sense of ability that we share is that there's a lot of different names we can use for a lot of the different kind of like conclusions we come to,
and there's a lot of different sort of like, you know, there's ways that we can sort of end up at different kinds of strategic thinking or whatever that come out of this sort of like fundamental shift in worldview that we were both just talking about,
but that it would be awfully nice if we could somehow like find a language or develop a culture and a politics where acknowledging that shift in world, like we could acknowledge that shift in worldview as the basis for some kind of affinity or shared, you know,
project, work, sense of identity, whatever. And so I'm very interested in just kind of hearing about what your project is in that sense and your conception of it as anarcho-primitivist horticulture.
And then, you know, and then also if you kind of just want to tell us a little bit about what it actually is, you know, in concrete detail, what you're growing, how you grow it.
Yeah. Yeah, first of all, I got to say that I do agree with your criticism of early anarcho-primitivism, if it makes any sense to call it that.
Like, I've definitely noticed that there is a tendency probably more of a historical tendency or an obsession with just like immediate return hunter-gatherers and nothing else, right?
And like you said, you keep some chicken or you plan to see it and you're already halfway down the road to civilization and it's domestication, so it's bad and all this stuff.
And it just, from my perspective now, having read half of the book, the master of and his emissary, it takes me a while to get through dense literature like that.
But as far as I read it and as far as I listen to your episodes concerning this book, it just seems like very just left-brained nonsense to be so purist about stuff, right?
And I'm not a purist. Purism is, I think, very harmful and it doesn't make much sense.
Like, I'm living the organic life, but every now and then I just really enjoy an ice-cold glass of Pepsi, right?
And I don't have to be super purist about it. No, I never drink that stuff ever in my whole life.
Like, I don't get this whole aspect, but concerning anarcho-primitivism, if I may just speak on behalf of primitivism right quick, I mean, not that I'm in any position to do so.
I wouldn't be surprised if most anarcho-primitivists don't know who I am and never heard about my name.
But I just go ahead and announce that we're past that. We're past all this left-brained nonsense that you rightfully critiqued, right?
And I think that everybody who has made any experiences in that direction understands that, right?
As more and more people discover anarcho-primitivism or related ideologies and they do more experimenting in their own lives,
then I do think that we slowly as a movement, broadly speaking, we move away from that.
There is a lot more people who are able to see the nuance in the discussion, right?
You know, you talked in the last episode about the essay series that I wrote in defense of delayed return hunter gatherers, right?
And I was kind of, I was stirring up the pot a little bit with this thing because it annoyed me that people talk about delayed return hunter gatherers like they are bad.
And it's like, we cannot learn anything from them because they are complex and they have hierarchies and whatnot.
And I actually, I was very positively surprised by the feedback that I got from other anarcho-primitivists who were generally not opposed at all to what I was presenting.
And I think that I hope that this was kind of like the basis for developing just a more broad way to look at anarcho-primitivism.
You know, sometimes they say, I'm going to make, I'm going to make anarcho-primitivism family friendly again. That is my goal.
And I mean, you can think what you want about the label, right? Labels are always a thing. We talked about this in our email conversation, right?
That I see that there is a lot of problems that people have, especially in the United States with applying a label to themselves.
And I get a lot of this stuff. Like people say, yeah, I agree with anarcho-primitivism, but you know, there was this one guy who really romanticized hunter gatherers.
And I say, all right, but then that doesn't mean that you cannot call yourself an anarcho-primitivist, but you're just an anarcho-primitivist who disagrees with that, right?
Why is there like, I don't, I understand your criticism of labels. It makes sense because people tend to overdo it and create the role, construct the whole identity around it, right?
But you can also just use it as a way to not create group cohesion or some kind of sense of identity. And I mean, it is a clumsy term, anarcho-primitivism.
Now, if I would have just randomly choose a new term that would describe it better, I would probably use something like indigenism or something that involves like actual indigenous people.
The word primitive is, now it has a bad meaning, but we use it in a way like the original etymology of the word is just like the first one, the first of its kind.
And those indigenous people, they are the first of their kind, right? So it doesn't make sense.
And so, all right, the term is not the best, but we are somehow, we're stuck with it. So all right, we just use it. I don't care that much about it.
But yeah, being an anarcho-primitivist and developing anarcho-primitivism as a personal philosophy, ideology, whatever you want, while you're living on an organic permaculture farm is a different thing.
Because sometimes I think that all the people who are really purist about it, most of them, are they actually hunter-gatherers or do they sit in the city somewhere in some apartment block?
Like, okay, you blame me for domesticating animals and plants, but if you are not doing anything to that accord, then there is no need to criticize me, right?
Most of the people who make those criticisms, they are part of the system.
So yeah, it doesn't matter that much. Also, I do think that a lot of the accusations about anarcho-primitivists being like super radical that you only have to do this, it seems like a little bit of a straw man.
Like, I think that this idea of the anarcho-primitivist who just hates plant cultivation in general, it seems more like a criticism that was leveled against us.
And then it took on this whole meaning of itself, like it became the straw man.
And then people were thinking the straw man is actually anarcho-primitivism, all right?
So because we don't listen to what the anarcho-primitivists say, but oh, anarcho-primitivists probably don't like plant cultivation.
But anyway, we wanted to talk about what we're doing here in general and how that relates to anarcho-primitivism.
And I guess the first thing that makes sense to do is describe a little bit more the land that we live on and a little bit of our situation, right?
So Southeast Asia is quite densely settled compared to North America, for instance.
So we do have a rather small amount of land.
We have 3.2 acres, so that's not much really, but it's enough to work it with two people.
It's the right amount of work.
If it would be more, it would be a little bit more work.
But in the tropics, you're able to feed yourself of this kind of land.
If you have 3 acres, 4 acres, 5 acres, that's definitely enough for a small family in the end, if you have a real mature permaculture on it.
But we don't have that yet.
We got this piece of land.
It was originally a fruit orchard, a regular fruit orchard.
Half of it was like a giant bamboo plantation.
But so the thing is that nobody took care of it for almost 20 years, right?
It belonged to some villagers and then the Swiss guy that we know bought the piece of land as some kind of retirement safety because he doesn't get money from the government.
So he bought pieces of land in the past and sells them now so that he has enough money to live, right?
So the Swiss guy bought this piece of land and he just didn't do much with it because he didn't live here.
So it was just sitting around for a while, which was great because people around here, especially in the area where we live because it's mostly fruit farmers, they use so many pesticides.
And so the quantities of pesticides really unimaginable.
And so we were lucky that this piece of land was kind of like abandoned or fell off for a decade or two because it's better than you start with a place that just got sprayed last month, right?
Because those chemicals, they stay in the soil.
But still the land that we are living on, it's quite degraded, right?
It's a hillside. We're living on a pretty steep mountainside.
It's less steep in some places and more steep in other places.
It's like walking up stairs a lot of the time.
Like when we go feed the chicken, usually we start sweating because people don't prefer this kind of land.
People prefer a nice flat piece of land.
But we like it better.
Also because the whole Hill Tribe story that we have going on here in Thailand, the great book that you talked about at great length, The Art of Not Being Governed by James Scott was very influential and so like living higher up on a mountain.
You know, you talked about this in the, what was it?
The ethnogenesis series where you talked about your own experiences in living in Northern California and like the higher you went up the mountain, the more wild the people were.
Seriously.
Yeah, it is similar. It is similar here, like in our situation.
We're not even that far away from the main road, to be honest.
We're not that isolated.
But there is definitely the sense of we are perceived as being more wild than the people down in the village.
And the few neighbors around us as well. We have a little bit, we're all a little bit outlaws in some ways.
So it comes with altitude, right? And it just makes more sense for us to keep a little bit of distance between us and what happens down in the valley.
So we, I think I said that in the beginning, we were living in the south of Thailand and we rented this place.
And it got to the point where we had to look for our own piece of land. And it was kind of like almost fate.
We were at the point where we had no way out, no idea where we're going to go and live in the future, because the owner of the last project, he wanted to sell the land and we didn't have enough money.
And at the low point, the rock bottom of this, not just not knowing what the future will bring for us.
This friend of a friend, the Swiss guy, he sent us a mail and was like, hey, you guys are looking for land.
I happened to have this piece laying around. And so we moved there a month later.
We came one time to take a look at this place and we saw the mountains and we are right next to a nature reserve, like not a national park, but just like a protected area.
And so it was exactly what we wanted to do, right? Because we were living and at our last project in the south, we still had Wi-Fi, we still had electricity all the time.
We were connected to the grid. We were in the middle of a village. And so it started to annoy us more and more to be that much connected and that much a part of the society.
So it felt like just the next step to move here, because the first two years when we lived here, we did not have electricity. We lived off grid.
So a funny story, the land, it used to be connected to the grid because the last owner of the Swiss guy, he built a small concrete house.
He built a wooden house in which I'm sitting here. And in the past, when he built those houses, he actually paid for an electricity line to be laid until our place here.
But then a few years ago, one of the elephants came down and it's always the same story. The elephant just wants to eat some stuff and then the people want to chase away the elephant.
So they shoot their guns in the air or light firecrackers and it has the opposite effect. Most of the time they don't run away, but they get angry.
And so the elephant down in the valley, he was just ripping out palm trees and he fucked up the electricity line.
So the last owner, he never fixed it because it would have been too expensive and he didn't live here anyway.
So now we were off grid. We moved here knowing well that we would not have electricity for the first few months or maybe longer.
But it wasn't so bad. I just got to say this. We went down to the valley to the French places, the Swiss guy's place.
And we just charged our phone once per week and the headlamps that we used in the evening. So we were not 100% without electricity, but pretty much.
And because we already had this more radical approach to permaculture, sometimes we call it primitive permaculture.
So we have a large focus on the very basic teachings of permaculture which were inspired by indigenous horticulture.
Right. Bill mollison, he says that in the book permaculture in the very beginning says basically what I'm explaining here is just indigenous horticulture repackaged for people from developed countries.
Right.
So even before when we were still living in the south, we were more radical than other permaculture projects for lack of a better term.
We don't use electric tools. We don't use chainsaws. We hate chainsaws, man. If you hear them all the time, it makes you really.
So we have a little bit more primitivist approach to permaculture as well of just not being like, all right, but we don't need all the fancy things that other people have.
But we just try to do without first. And if it works, great. And if it doesn't work, then we'll talk about compromises.
Right. So two years ago, no, longer than three years ago, we bought like a small PV solar system. And so now we have a little bit of electricity.
We have a tiny fridge for some cold water, which is desperately needed in dry season right now.
We can charge our phone, our laptop and we have lights. It makes a lot of things easier.
We just have a few LEDs under the house, right? But yeah, it was, we also during those first two years, we just tried.
We didn't use any soap at all. And it worked. It worked as well. So we took this place here, this piece of land, and we said this is going to be the next level of our experiment.
And in the name of our project, Fönfu Permaculture and Rewilding, we use the term permaculture, which some people agree with, some people disagree with, but it's the same thing as I said about anarcho-primitivism.
David Holmgren, he made fun of it in an interview that I watched recently where he said, people don't like the label permaculture because there was this one guy who said something nasty or there was this one project that didn't really work.
But it's, we are, we are, we are all right now. We don't have to agree with every single other permaculture project out there to just use the term because it does make some sense.
It does describe in some way the direction in which we're going. And we also use the term rewilding, right?
And by that we mean not only the rewilding of the landscape, how it is often phrased, but the rewilding of the land and of the human inhabitants at the same time because it's the same process, right?
And with our particular approach, we just take inspiration from the jungle, right? We just do what the land wants us to do.
So if you, it's easy to figure out what the land wants by just taking a piece of land and just looking at it or looking how it develops after humans stop messing it up.
And in the tropics, if you leave any patch of land alone for long enough, you will get forest, right?
So that is pretty much what the land itself wants. It wants to grow forest.
And so we say, all right, so how do we help the land doing this while at the same time, like getting a little bit, getting the necessities for life out of this ecosystem that we are creating?
And that is taking inspiration from the jungle. It goes down to the details, right?
So if you go to the jungle, you will find that barely ever any patch of land is not covered in leaves or vegetation.
So we say, all right, this seems to be very important. So we'll try to do the same thing.
So wherever we see bare earth in our garden, we should try our best to cover it up as soon as possible, mulch, throw some branches, some leaves on there or plant some stuff.
Because that's how the ecosystem in which we are embedded in seems to work.
So in the jungle, nobody needs to put in fertilizer, nobody needs to spray pesticides, nobody needs to water the trees.
But the trees are larger than anywhere else, right? The trees produce like tons of fruit at times without anybody doing anything to it.
And so we are like, all right, so let's try to recreate a system like that.
But just put in a higher density of plants that we can eat or use in general, like for weaving or construction or whatever, really, making instruments, making...
I just found two beautiful pieces of rat in the other day. I'm going to make a bow because my old recurve bow broke.
And so it's part of the thing. We just want to be able...
In the easiest of terms, we want to be able to basically hunt and gather on our small piece of land, if that makes any sense.
So our approach is not creating a garden or a farm or a field, per se, as people understand it.
But just a forest where you can just walk around and harvest stuff, right?
And maybe hunt some of the squirrels or birds or whatever that live here.
In the forest ecology, generally speaking, in a fairly undisturbed landscape, like say the nature preserve you're adjacent to, is there an understory that is there like a fairly significant density of sort of like ground level vegetation in addition to the trees?
Or is it kind of like once there's sufficient canopy cover, it's pretty much like dead leaves on the ground?
Yeah, I have to say right quick. So the nature reserve right next to our place was devastated by a forest fire about 20 years ago, 25 years ago.
And so afterwards, it's quite degraded. Like right around our piece of land, it is mostly running bamboo.
And so you have to walk for like half an hour maybe, and then you'll get two pieces of just more beautiful secondary forest.
And then you have to walk an hour or more until you get to see like really big trees.
So right in our area, it's not like we have like the perfect old growth jungle right next to us.
Right. So it is, we actually, we tried, we wrote a reforestation proposal 50 pages and we submitted it to the forest rangers.
And because we made this experience here, I said we had like a half of our land used to be dry and bamboo.
And we just took out half of that because we don't need that much bamboo, and we just let it rewild and planted some seeds or fruit trees in between.
And we saw that like it's really, the forest grows back really fast with very little human intervention.
So we made the logical conclusion and we said, all right, so in this area around our garden, if somebody would just cut all the fucking bamboo, just do that.
Then other trees would be able to grow and we wrote this really nice proposal.
And in the end, the forest rangers, they ghosted us like they didn't even say no, but they were like, yeah, I'll come and take a look.
They didn't reply to emails and so yeah.
But to your original question, like the what what we have in mind in the end will look more like a forest.
It will look more like that already we start to have like multiple levels like multi store a storied forest canopy emerging, which can be trees that we will use.
Before it can be just wild trees. Some of the trees that form the canopy right now we're going to actually we're going to chop them down in the future.
Especially the areas where we where we grow vegetables right now or where we want to grow vegetables in the future.
We're going to cut holes into the canopy we're going to cut down some of the trees here and there to create a break in the canopy so that you have more sunlight and all that right.
But overall, what we try to do is we try to just live off the land, eat off the land, and we don't want to impose like our civilized cultural dietary expectations on the land.
But we look at the land and we're like, what is there in abundance, what is there, what do we have on this land that there's really a lot of and then we just eat that.
Right, so we eat a strange diet compared to the other people other people don't understand why we eat the stuff that we eat.
In the beginning we ate a lot of banana flowers because it was just the stuff that was laying around.
But anyway, so in the future, our focus with this project already is staple crops, which you talked about with Shane on in your little interview, because Shane also has a focus on that, right.
And he explained it very well that you know you got to eat so you can grow fruits and vegetables and it's nice and it's fun.
But in the end, it's not what you will subsist on, right.
And so I agree with Shane on this, it is very important to have a large focus on staple crops.
And so for us, that means a very, very strong focus on tree crops like jackfruit, breadfruit and all that stuff, because they have an extremely high energy return on energy invested.
But a long time delay, right, if I plant a jackfruit tree, the seeds of the jackfruit you can boil them and eat them they taste like potatoes, right.
And one tree can live several hundred years and can give you I don't know how many hundreds of kilos of fruit per year in the end.
But so the actual work that you have to put into the calories that you have to expend on planting the tree, watering it a little bit in the first year and then just basic maintenance just clip off a branch here and there.
And if there is a vine climbing it, you just take it out.
So you don't have to spend a lot of time or energy, but you just wait for the tree to grow and then after I don't know five, six, seven years the tree will just throw food at you for free where you don't have to do anything other than process it and eat it right.
So it seems to us like what makes the most sense in terms of workload and ease is to focus on tree crops and that's what we do.
Now and not only tree crops, but what what we call forest crops.
So other other stuff as well other plants that can live in a forest ecosystem that are able to survive right another big focus that we have in terms of staple crops is purple yams.
Not like the sweet sweet potatoes some people in the US they call like regular sweet potatoes yams but the ones that we have it's massive tubers they can easily be like 10 kilos or larger.
And they grow vines.
So you you plant a small tree in the earth.
And then there's a vine just growing climbing into the vegetation and you don't need to take care at all about those things they search for the wrong sunlight there is strong enough to not get nutrients out of the environment without us having to fertilize.
And you just wait for two or three years and then you have this massive tube that you can dig up and you can eat it with two people we eat it for three or four days.
So that is kind of the in terms of staple food, the direction that we try to take.
Right, we do a little bit of everything now we are generalists we we have a bunch of beehives.
Right now only one of them is inhabited because it's getting difficult with the insects and all that.
We have a bunch of rabbits we have some chickens and we do whatever we can ourselves we do like primitive carpentry when we need a new bench or table or whatever.
We do weaving when now when we need a basket or some some dry rack for drying leaves or whatever in the sun we weave it ourselves.
We're not particularly skilled at any of those things.
But yeah we're generalists we try to do everything at the same time.
It takes it takes time this this kind of work especially if you start without electricity because you know we had we got a water our vegetable beds.
And so in the beginning we pumped the water by hand we had like a mechanical pump and we attached a wheel to it and we were turning the wheel several thousand times per day.
And we got enough water the year afterwards we connected it to a bicycle which made it a little bit easier.
But now we tried it the hard way and now we say all right we could live without electricity and it would just be a little bit more work.
And once we got our solar system we said all right we're going to go we're going to compromise we're going to buy like a little electric motor because we have the batteries anyway and that way we just have more time to do other stuff.
Right because I'm not going to lie this kind of lifestyle it is exhausting it is a lot of work.
If you're serious about it you do sweat you do now it's it's not like oh you just sit around and play guitar for half the day right it does take effort and it is not always easy right.
But it's worth it.
For us it is worth it and I'm proud to say like it's it's difficult for us to give like actual numbers of how much of the what percentage of the food we grow and what do we what we buy because it really depends on a lot of things like in
the training season there is times where we definitely get 90% or more from the of the food from our land.
Otherwise it's a little bit lower.
So the thing is we have a little bit of an ace up our sleeve in terms of nutrition because my partner she comes from the northeast of the country and her families are rice farmers.
So for the moment it is like we have outsourced a little bit of rice production we have like an extra acre somewhere in the northeast.
Because once per year or twice per year my partner she goes back home and she helps with the planting of the rice and with the harvest of the rice.
And in exchange for that we just get a few bags of rice.
And then usually one time one time per year her sister comes to visit us in fruit season when our mature fruit trees produce a lot of abundance.
Then they come and visit us and we load their pickup truck full with fruit and in exchange they bring us a few more bags of rice.
And so that means that we don't have to buy a lot of food at all because we have this rice going on this gift economy with my partner's family.
And so that makes things a lot easier.
But of course in the long term we want to reduce rice even more and just eat more stuff that we grow on our land obviously.
Maybe I have to point out right quick because I'm talking about my partner.
So she is the right hemisphere to my left hemisphere I sometimes say.
She grew up in the countryside in the northeast of Thailand and she experienced the simple life and like the really romantic version of the simple life.
Her family is quite poor but that wasn't that big of a deal when there is food everywhere around you in the environment.
Right when you can just go fishing.
The stuff that you said it is so profound and I quoted it to so many people.
What was it again like a people become fundamentally unfree when they're not able to subsist off the land or something to that accord.
That is true.
You can be poor but your life is not bad if you have food around you free for the taking.
If you're embedded in a healthy ecosystem it's not so bad to be poor.
It's the economic superstructure and all the stuff and all the forcing to do monoculture farming and being part being dependent on the economy for your needs.
That is where really the big trouble starts but like a lot of people from this area they have a very romantic is maybe the wrong word.
They really enjoyed life in the past even though they didn't have a lot of money.
My partner she comes from a family that is quite traditional.
They maintain a lot of the animistic original Southeast Asian beliefs like the guardian spirit of the land and they pray to the spirit of the rice and all that.
And they harvest the rice by hand.
They are the last family in the village because my partner's mom she is quite strict about this.
She says no we don't want to use this fucking machine.
It makes the soil hard.
It compacts the soil and also it is always such a nice time the rice harvest because the family gets together and it's this communal work.
They harvest rice but at the same time they sing and they joke and they eat together.
So it is not toil or drudgery or something like that but there is a good aspect to it.
And so because my partner made those experiences in the past now she has all in all the family is like eight siblings.
So it's a large family like most families were at that time.
And so she is the first person in her family to graduate from university.
And after graduation she moved to Phuket and she worked like in a fancy five star hotel at first and then she switched and she did real estate for a while.
But both of those things were so boring and alienated and you know especially working in a hotel where the guests look down on you because it's like the super rich people who treat the brown servants like shit because they
want to pay money and feel like back in the good old days of colonialism again or whatever their motivation is.
So my partner she also went through this experience of just getting really fed up with society as it is right now.
But for her it was a lot easier because she had her childhood experience to draw on and be like alright if this sucks then we just do now it would be better to do something that is more simple that is more human scale
than a village scale right.
And so she, there is this profound sadness that she feels a lot of the time at just the collapse of the biosphere and the traditional lifestyle you know the local ecology or the forest where they used to go and hunt insects
and gather mushrooms when they were children.
It's all sugar cane plantations these days, right.
That is like a very powerful motivation to say fuck it I'm not going to go the normal way I'm not going to do what everybody tells me to because it is wrong it's the wrong direction.
But I want to go back to that kind of lifestyle to this kind of experience.
This connection to the land that I never had, she had it since she was a little child.
Since she was born probably.
Yeah, and that's something that is not accounted for in you know there's there's all of these statements by economists about how people are being lifted out of poverty and so called developing world.
And it's like, it's like yeah they you know they got incorporated into the market economy, you know, and so now instead of making $2 a day some people are making $4 a day.
But it's like it's like in their conception of, you know, there isn't a phase before the $2 a day where you just have what you needed.
Yes, exactly, exactly.
That is such a big problem and it hurts to see that happening around you it hurts to see people throw away a traditional wisdom for modern stuff, which is what is happening on a massive scale here right now.
But now circling back to our project and what it is we do.
I talked about the inspiration that we take from the forest right and a lot of what we do is actually just based on observation observing what the land is doing without intervention.
And then we try to figure out some kind of underlying system or tendency like there is certain natural processes and we can speed them up or we can slow them down or we can even reverse them to some extent.
And we try to do that to the benefit of all the inhabitants of the land, including us of course but not only us, right.
We live on the hillside so the soil erosion is a massive topic for us a massive problem.
And so we see that this is the natural process and we see that it would be beneficial to slow this process down or even to reverse it to some extent like the the pond that we have where we draw our water from it's at the lowest point of the land and so we
in dry season right now one of the things we do is we just carry mud and buckets uphill from the pond where all the sediment lands back up and we just dump it around the fruit trees to reverse basically the soil erosion.
It's a little more than you call it the Chinese peasant approach to permaculture because apparently that's what they did in the past a lot and we do it as well and it works.
It works wonders man.
It's excellent, excellent fertilizer and stuff very fertile develops into very fertile soil.
It's just it is a lot of work.
God damn it really.
But so yeah, that is the focus on soil in general right this is something that is probably.
intrinsic to permaculture is that we say now if you have good soil, everything else will be good as well, you don't need to spray chemicals and stuff to kill insects and not try to counteract nutrient deficiencies with chemical fertilizers.
So let's work on having good soil first because if you have the good soil, it has the water retention capacity it has the microbial life the fungal life in it that those things will take care of most of the problems that people have in monocultures.
trees can or plants in general they can manufacture like in saying insect repellent compounds, if they have the necessary resources to do so and if they live in sterile soil and they just get doused with NPK and the main nutrients and chemical form.
Then they will grow and they will produce a lot of food but a lot of other stuff they can't really do.
Like the whole if we would use the analogy of the animal body the immune system of the plant depends on a lot of like tiny little compounds we just start learning about this stuff like little molecules that they get in exchange for for for carbohydrates in some
with some tiny bacterium or fungi or whatever and so yeah we we we try to look at why does it work in in nature in wild nature for lack of a better term.
Why, why are the trees in the forest not being infested and eaten up by bugs, but the people of the, the durian trees of the people here in the area, the cash crop has this problem and how how can we learn
the jungle to avoid this problem in the first place that's what I'm trying to say right and so working with the soil is one of the most important things for us, creating good soil recreating good soil, because not just our
land it when when people first started farming on this land here, it used to be jungle in the past right like almost every other place in Southeast Asia.
So what people did at the time, like 50 years ago, I don't know, and they just cut down the jungle and they burned it all.
Just to clear the land really not not like a slash and burn like the traditional way but really just clear the land, and then they planted rice on the land for probably for several seasons.
We talked to the villagers about it and it's difficult to establish like a real timeline for it, but the land was abused terribly during that time and lost all of its top soil.
So they started out with with land that is pretty degraded now underneath the very thin layer of top soil in the tropics.
I think 90% of the carbon in the tropics is in the vegetation and not in the soil. Oh, temperate climates. Yeah, really.
And in temperate climates it is a lot different right in Germany you have very deep soils like very dark rich soils in some places.
And that's not the case here. So once the top soil erodes, you are left with this. It's called laterite soil. It's like an orange red clay really really heavy.
And so that is kind of what what we started with here on our land and so this is also why we have this focus on soil and tree crops because they are they re they restore the soil much faster than other stuff.
And yeah, where am I taking this? That's pretty much all I wanted to say about this for now. Do you have any questions?
Yeah, so just in terms of rebuilding the soil you have I guess leaf litter right coming in from the trees. So that's one input.
And then do your chickens break down the leaf litter? Are they part of the soil building process?
Of course. Like we in the beginning like regular fruit orchards everybody has seen most places there is like it looks a little bit like a chess board and then you have like trees at certain intervals planted in like perfectly straight rows.
And in between there is nothing, nothing at all. And that's how everybody around here is planting fruit trees. And we just think it is so waste.
You could plant so much stuff in between. So our orchard like the bottom half of our land also looked like that in the beginning. So the first thing that we did is we just filled in those gaps.
We got wild forest trees from the nursery, the tree nursery of the forest rangers here. They give them a way for free and we just planted whatever in between and not only planting but just letting stuff grow that already grows there.
And so after five years on the land it slowly starts to get better. It's in the first few years we just did not have enough leaf litter to cover everything.
So now finally we start to get that biomass. We do a lot of chop and drop if you're familiar with that term.
No, but I think explain it. I think I can imagine.
Yeah, so if you look at wild forest trees and if you look at cultivated fruit trees and you plant one forest tree, one fruit tree next to each other, the forest tree will grow a lot faster obviously.
It knows the soil, it knows the local ecology, it is very strong, has a root system, can look for its own nutrients and fruit trees are generally not that strong like at least the cultivated stuff.
But so the thing is if you look at an adult tree, then you can be sure that all the nutrients that are needed for a plant to grow are in that tree.
They make up the body of the tree. So the adult tree already successfully figured out how to get all the nutrients.
And what we do instead of fertilization is we chop down adult trees. We do chop and drop.
Sometimes we cut down entire trees that are as big as my leg. We always cut them down at like a waist height more or less so that they are able to resprout and many of them will.
And then we just mulch the entire area, especially right around the fruit trees with the branches and the leaves and like bigger parts of wood, we just put them along the slope to create some kind of barrier and over time to create some
terrace that slows down the runoff. And as the wood breaks down and decomposes, all the nutrients that make up the body of this plant are released back into the environment.
Not all of them, but most of them. And so they are being made accessible to the other plants. And so instead of fertilization of our fruit trees, we do a lot of that.
And another positive side effect is, of course, that you rejuvenate the area, right? Because you have this process. We're going to talk about it in a second, I guess, because it's a big part of the traditional shifting cultivation that you work with ecological succession.
So ecological succession in the tropics, like I said, the land wants to create a forest. So if you take a barren piece of land, then there's the pioneers arriving first to cover up the soil as fast as possible.
Probably a lot of them are legumes. So now they produce, they fix nitrogen, atmospheric nitrogen with the symbiosis that they have going on in their roots. They just create biomass and shadow.
And so once this basic condition is established, other plants will start growing the next step or the next phase of ecological succession.
The first trees that appear are usually softwood trees whose only job is basically to create shade and biomass, accumulate biomass.
And so then the hardwood species that come later in the ecological succession that become dominant later on, they start growing in the shadow.
So if you have a barren piece of land and you just let ecological succession do its thing, then you will end up with forest in the end.
And so what we do and what the traditional shifting cultivators do in the area or did in the past is we reset ecological succession at certain places and at certain times.
Now, because a lot of the crops that we humans like to eat these days, they are earlier successional species, right?
Granes, for example, you know that whole story, right? That basically if you're, the grains are kind of grass and grass is usually an earlier successional plant.
Like if there is an injury to the land and soil is exposed, grasses will grow, right?
And so what we have to do with grain agriculture is we have to forcibly reset ecological succession year after year after year to create this certain ecological niche.
Earlier successional niche in which the grain will grow, right? And if you do that too much, it's not good.
But if you do that every now and then, and you don't reset it every single year, but you go with the flow, then the system that you can get is a lot less labor intensive and it is more based on working together with nature as opposed to really
waging war against nature, which is what grain agriculture is. You have to forcibly reset ecological succession each year to create the right conditions for your crops to grow.
But because we want to eat some of those plants as well, some of the more hardy vegetables, for example, we do every now and then every year and there create those breaks in the canopy.
What we simulate is basically like in the jungle sometimes a tree falls down, right?
Storm or whatever or an elephant pushes it a little bit too hard or whatever.
So there is breaks being created in the canopy. And so this is one of those things that I was talking about where we look at natural processes and we think about which of them can we speed up or slow down or something.
And so we speed up this kind of creating breaks in the canopy is this like slight disturbances to the ecology that actually benefit the overall ecology.
Because if you don't do anything at all, the forest reaches its climax state and then there is very little happening afterwards, right?
The carbon sequestration levels, I think they basically flat line at a certain point when you reach like the maximum thing.
And if you do the slight disturbances every now and then, like if you cut down a tree and let's say you let it decompose or you use part of it to make charcoal and you work that charcoal into the soil so that the carbon is requested for a longer time.
So you can utilize those natural processes for the benefit of not only yourself but really the entire system because the whole ecosystem benefits when there is a higher carbon content in the soil, right?
Yeah, I often think when I hear about forest horticulturalists, which is more or less exclusively something I read about in tropical climates, but since I haven't spent any time in the tropics, what I think about is where my grandfather lived in Vermont,
this patch of eastern deciduous forest, mixed evergreens and deciduous trees, where there was like this tiny patch, a tree or two had fallen over at some point and he planted potatoes just in this like tiny gap and then surrounding it were apple and maple trees.
So yeah, like apples and maple syrup coming out of it, you know, and it's like, it's like the gap is not big enough that it's going to meaningfully diminish the, you know, the habitat value for any forest dwelling species of the area.
But you can get like a lot of potatoes out of a little spot like that. And then otherwise you're eating from the trees. And I don't know. I don't know if you maybe know the answer to this, but I've always really wondered just what, you know, that you'll read these papers about like, okay, what are kind of like the ultimate carbon sequestration
potentials of sort of reforesting areas, if we just like assumed that everywhere devoted to grain agriculture had to stay like that. But yeah, some like we could stop as much industrial logging or whatever. And I always wonder like, okay, but what if we switched our diets to more arboreal species,
right? You know, in which case we could be living off of forests, you know, to a much greater extent. And I mean, I really think that would have a huge, huge, the carbon coefficients on that must be massive. I don't know what it is, but it must be huge.
Yes, definitely, especially in the tropics, because our trees get a little bit bigger than yours. I mean, okay, you have redwoods. But now if you leave the trees grow, like in only the five years plus that we live here.
How fast the trees grow in the tropics is just incredible, really. It's a lot easier to do this kind of stuff, food forest in the tropics, because now our trees grow basically throughout the whole year. They don't have this forest break in winter.
So the ecosystem is very productive. Everything gets cycled very fast. The cycle of life is spinning fast in the tropics, what I say sometimes. Stuff grows faster, but it also decays really fast.
So another thing, you asked about our chickens, right? Maybe I'll address that for a second, because it's also one of those things where you made fun of it and you said that that's what they said. You cannot be an anarcho-primitivist if you keep some chickens.
So yeah, and sometimes I get those comments, right? I had one person telling me that I'm enslaving my chicken. Really, though, like I'm living here and I'm looking at my chicken and they don't seem particularly enslaved to me, right?
It all depends on what you actually do with them, what the relationship is that you develop, and it does not have to be a relationship of slavery, right? That's not what domestication means, no?
I guess that's a good place as any to talk about this thing that you always point out. Now, where you had to get over this, the wild and domesticated thing. Now, where you figured out, alright, domestication is not what I thought it is, right?
And so for you, it was like a very big, now you had to let go of all those ideas of what wildness means and what domestication means. And so I think that many people, like generally, they just don't really know what domestication actually is, right?
They think that it is domestication, like, if you beat animals into submission, the stuff that you know from what they do to elephants sometimes, that is not domestication, right?
If you boil it down like you always say, domestication is basically not selecting against aggression, and that is what we do with our chickens.
We don't enslave them, we don't have to beat our chickens all day long for them to lay eggs for us. But so the real difference here is not wild versus domesticated, I think, but just enslaved versus free, right?
Like you can definitely keep chicken in a way that it's obvious that they are slaves, but you can also just keep chicken in a way that where they are very free, you know, where they can do whatever they want, right?
And so our chicken, they sleep in the trees, we made a house for them, but they're not interested. They like to sleep in the trees even if it rains.
They mingle every now and then with the wild chicken that we have in this nature reserve right next to our garden. There's actually wild jungle fowl living here.
Sure, yeah.
And so we do keep them in a fenced area, but that is more for their own protection and our convenience. So if they want to, they can totally just fly out of this cage.
It's an enclosure. I don't know how big it is. It is big enough for all the chickens to stay in there and it's not too terrible. But like if they want to get out, they can totally just fly out and that's what they do every day.
They make holes into the fence as well and they just go and forage and they make a big round through the garden and we don't care because it's their right.
If there's no food in the chicken pen, then of course they got to look for the food somewhere else. And so they forage and they walk through the garden and they work through the leaf layer and find some insects and all that.
And then once they start getting closer to our house, we have to chase them away a little bit because we don't want them to devastate our vegetable beds.
So we do say, alright, here's the border, but we just chase them away. We throw stuff at them to make them afraid.
But apart from that, they are free to do whatever they like and it works out very well.
Especially this year, we had a lot of problems with snakes like the first round of baby chicks did not survive at all, not a single one because snakes ate all of them during the night.
And so we built like a little cage out of plastic mesh and if we have young chicks, we put them inside of this little cage for the night.
And we go and check every evening because if there's a snake, we kill it and we eat it.
If the snake eats some of our chickens and we therefore cannot eat the chicken, we just eat the snake instead, right, permaculture teachers, that the problem is the solution.
So the problem to a snake eating your chickens is you eating the snake. It's as simple as that, right.
But apart from that, like we do, the chickens definitely, they fill an ecological role.
If there would be no humans at all around, there would be a lot more birds and other wildlife, obviously, but there would be actually chicken in this area who work through the leaf litter.
So our chickens, they fulfill an ecological role. They cycle nutrients, if we have leftover fruit, leftover food, we give it to them as well.
And we just, within this fence in area, this chicken pen, we just dump leaves in there, just big bags of leaves.
If we clear some area or by the side of the road where there's always leaves accumulating, we don't burn them, we don't throw them away, we don't compost them,
but we throw them all in the chicken fence because the chickens, they work through it and they mix it with their own shit.
And in the end, like before rain season arrives, because it's a slope, at the down slope, we collect this very rich, soft soil that they have created over the year.
And we just use that in our vegetable beds. So we do a lot of this kind of stuff as well.
All of the animals that we live with, we try to give them as much autonomy and freedom as possible.
And we try to let them live according to the life that they were designed for by evolution.
Yeah, that makes sense.
And all that serves as, now, one of the things, sometimes we say we call ourselves a multi-species community, because we are friends with them to a certain extent, right?
Nate Hagan, he recently said, what was it? He said, only half of my best friends are humans and I can totally, totally understand that because you develop relationships to the animals that you live with, right?
You realize that there is a massive spectrum of different behaviors within a single species, within a single group.
You have some chicken who are more open towards novelty and others who are not.
Oh, totally.
Yes. And sometimes it gets annoying. We had this one, we had this one rooster who came so close to the house that he would just look for insects and worms right under our house.
And every time when we were not there, then we would come back and the whole house would be devastated.
So that's where we draw the line and we killed him and we ate him because it's people generally who don't know much about this kind of lifestyle.
They think it is always like this big tragedy if you have to slaughter an animal and they say, oh, how can you kill your chicken?
They all have names and yeah, but some of them are just assholes.
Some of them just don't know. Some of them, we had roosters who ate eggs like some hen is laying eggs and the rooster goes there and just destroys all of the eggs.
So individuals like that, we take them out now for ourselves because we can eat chicken and also for the benefit of the entire group, of course, because the group has much higher survival potential.
If you don't have individuals like that or just chicken would just look for trouble would just fight all the time.
That's the next chicken that will land in the pot on the grill.
So it's not like we're super sad when we kill an animal, but sometimes it's necessary. Sometimes you have to know and it is really for the better of the whole group.
And also we just one of the things that we do that we really like to do is we just try to know, as I said with the plants and natural processes that we observe them.
We also observe wildlife and we interact with other animals as good as possible like even
we always answer to bird calls if there is birds around in the area and they sing and we try to imitate them.
And some of them seem confused and others seem it seems like a game to them like they come closer and then you do this.
They make a sound and you make a sound and then the sound that they make gets more and more complex until you lose the game.
And you're like, all right, I cannot whistle that.
Yeah, we have the monkeys that come to our garden sometimes.
You know, it's a Rises macaque monkeys and they raid our fruit trees on the border to the forest every year during mangosteen season.
They come and they take their share.
We also we we interact with them like we we try that they are really afraid of people because people hunted them in the past just shot them for fun and they almost went extinct.
And so they are really afraid of us but a few a few days ago last week or the week before we saw one of the monkeys really like up close like maybe I don't less than 10 meters between us and he was eating some of our plum mangoes and we were in the area and he looked at us and we looked at him.
And you have a lot of those those living like this you just create opportunities and occasions for interactions like this, you know, if you live in a forest garden like this and you plant food not only for yourself but for other animals as well.
Now you you are constantly find yourself interacting with animals and it is not not not as profound as the experience that you told with what was it a crow or raven.
So we we don't have this like full blown experience out of body and whatnot, but we totally observe each other and we are aware that we observe each other.
And this this happens with all kinds of insects, you know praying mantis, for example, like the tiny little insects.
One of the few insects they can move their head around right so they actually look at you they look you right in the eyes if you encounter them, they will turn their head and they will look at you.
And with elephants as well. God damn man we have now there is elephants walking through the area here and the farmers here hate them because they eat their crops.
That is what they say.
But what we do is we we plant food for the elephants.
We look at what what does the elephant like wild bananas and pineapple plants and whatever and we plan this stuff exclusively for the elephants we planted along our border and also we just leave the plants that the elephants eat.
We just leave them standing because everybody else is cutting them out. Now there is a few palm trees whether the elephants they eat the trunk of the palm tree because it contains starch.
Everybody else cuts them out all of them and says no no it will attract the elephants the elephants they come to your garden all the time if there's food.
But we do the opposite we say all right if there is a fish tail palm growing here we just leave it standing and from our experiences in this short five years that we live on the land.
We never ever had any problems with elephants whatsoever they come every year and every year at least once they walk through our entire garden without damaging even a single plant like you would not believe it.
It really it seems like a mystical experience each time this happens because everybody else has a lot of problems the elephants they go into our charts and they knock over mature fruit trees and they just throw fruit on the ground and step on it.
And to us it seems so obvious night is of course the elephants do that because you don't plan food for them there's no food you eradicate their food source.
So those elephants who have lived here way before humans were on the arrived on this continent right there were elephants walking around everywhere and they had food everywhere and so over the years and centuries and millennia.
More and more forest disappeared and the elephants have another life got considerably harder like the I have the numbers like in around 1900 there was estimated to be 100,000 elephants.
Here in Thailand and now it is down to like three or 4000 so that's a 95 96 97% reduction.
So it's a genocide let's call it what it is it's a genocide that happened here.
And the fruit farmers are trying to starve the elephants out to say alright we just eradicate anything that they can eat and hope that they don't come to our gardens anymore.
The thing is elephants are on the move they're constantly walking right and they revisit the paths that they've been walking and their ancestors have been walking.
And so what changes for the elephants is alright I've walked this path for decades and decades and decades and there was always food but now there is nothing and of course it makes them angry of course they feel the rage of just what is happening.
Why do people do that why don't they want to share why do they chase us away we don't even are interested in their fucking crops we just want to eat some stuff and move on right.
And so because we do things so radically different from other people.
We believe that that is the main reason why we never have problems with elephants why the elephants never freak out why they never push over trees in our garden is really the.
If you if you would be able to see it there is like tiny trees that we just planted and the elephant steps right over them right like the like the elephant is aware of the plants that we planted and the plants that are wild.
And so sometimes it's like instead of eating the wild bananas at the bottom of our land.
The elephant walks through our entire garden and eats the wild fishtail palm in the upper part of the land without damaging anything else because that's the elephant food and the elephant knows that it's growing there and it's like.
Yeah, it's like a relationship of trust and respect that we try to develop with the elephants.
We don't have any lights on at night it is completely dark dark our garden, the opposite of what our neighbors do.
We never chase them around we never light fire crackers we never make big fires to chase them away with the smoke or whatever else the people are doing.
And it works very well so far now it is really the the the feeling that you have when you wake up in the middle of the night because now you hear the crunching of an elephant eating sugarcane like five meters in front of your house right and.
Man, it is incredible it is something that now it changes you in a way that is very very difficult to put it into words you you develop it's very easy to develop the like this deep.
Reverence like profound respect and love for the living world and all its inhabitants right because they are so powerful and they are so beautiful.
And you get to experience them up close man.
What that's incredible that's, that's really beautiful.
What what kind of are we talking about, like, we're talking about families mostly right like be like a group come through all at once is that usually how it is.
Most of the time in our area is we are living on one side of a valley and on the other side of the valley there is a much larger mountain range and so usually the elephant families are on the other side of that.
Okay, because there is a lot more a lot more land available for them.
And because the land here is a little degraded, most of the time the elephants that we get it's this phase where they walk around young males.
Exactly, so we get a lot of young males who walk around here.
One time we had a mother with a baby, not sure belonging to any group or not.
But they didn't even walk through our garden they just walked into our garden and then back out on very bottom.
So most of the time it is single elephants but in in the past the last owner the Swiss guy he told us that in the past they were like groups of five to 10 elephants.
And we are still waiting we hope that one day we get visited by a larger group because now when we talk to people here.
We really you have to be so careful when talking about elephants with the people here because they get offended very easily and because they have very strong opinions.
They would, I think they would like it better if there would be no elephants at all to be to be honest, many of the farmers here, not all of them, of course.
But so yeah, one thing that they say is oh yeah you don't have to worry about elephants because there was never a big group that walked through your garden.
And we don't care we say all right if there's a big group let it walk through the garden if they destroy some of the plants we just replant them what's the big deal if they eat some of the fruit we just wait for the next season.
So why it wouldn't even be that big of a deal for us if bigger groups would arrive we would actually we would we would appreciate it because then we could say look, a big group came and still nothing much happened so what seems to be the problem here.
And is it like, is it your impression that people in your part of the world who have the kind of extractive the extractive mindset but at least are in direct proximity to elephants sometimes because here in the in the US the the interactions the
interactions with elephants that occur are that sometimes they break out a zoos and sometimes they attack the they attack like their trainers and stuff like that and they are very targeted about it.
They specifically go after people who have done them wrong and they exactly they will do so, even while incurring knowing perfectly well that they are going to incur great consequences for themselves.
Out of a sense of justice right out of a sense of rage, you know at the domination they're experiencing. And so I wonder, do you think that the like farmers and stuff in your part of the world.
Do they understand that elephants understand what's happening to them and understand that they're, you know, their families are breaking apart and there's less and less of them because of what people are doing and that they can make these kinds of
distinctions that they can decide to leave your eyes as garden alone.
Yeah, no, to be perfectly honest.
I think, I think people are aware that elephants are quite smart, but they are not aware of the extent to which those elephants are like with the capabilities that they have the other cultures that they create the rituals that they that they make when they are left alone right
so I, I don't think that people necessarily understand the broad and the depth of elephant consciousness.
There is like some people do understand it you have of course as everywhere on the world it's a big spectrum of people that you encounter in the countryside, and you have occasionally people who understand them better than others but like the great majority
of people don't and couldn't care less and sometimes I really have to be a little careful not to sound racist or condescending when I talk about farmers here but it's I always point out that it's it's the same thing as farmers all over the world right
what you always talked about like in the first few episodes that people self select into different professions and different regions according to where they fall on this spectrum.
The countryside you end up having more people who are with a certain kind of psychological makeup right and that that happened here as well so you have a lot of people who think that nature is like our bank account and we can draw down as much as we want.
We know the they say money is in the ground all we have to do is get it out that's a thing that you that you hear quite often in this area, right.
But then at the same time the few people that we know from the village here that we are friends with and that we visit.
There is people who tell us stories like really, and this is stuff it sounds unbelievable but we we heard it from many different people in the area and so there has to be something to it.
So we we know that elephants can feel a sense in some way whether they encounter a friendly human or an enemy somebody who wants them harm.
And when they walk into our garden my partner she has like a little prayer or something that she she says and we like talk in a very low very quiet voice.
We talked to the elephant while he walks through the garden, saying random things like you can eat whatever you like just be a little bit careful.
There is chickens up there don't be afraid.
Please don't destroy the fence and all those things.
And the elephants walk along those tiny narrow footpaths that we use as well and nothing happened to the chicken fence so far, for example.
And I mean elephants have incredibly good ears and a very good sense of smell.
So definitely they are aware of the fact that we are in the house and that we're making noises and probably they have some way to like sense emotional states or whatever like we could go and come up with theories of why that is the case.
Like there is a theory by Stephen Harrod Boone who says that it has to do with the heart and the heart's perception of being able to emit and receive electromagnetic fields.
And I don't know what there is to it but there is some way or another that those elephants can sense or feel the intentions of an of a human being.
And there is a story that people tell again and again here in the village. There is this one guy on the other side of the village who really didn't like elephants and really didn't want them to go into his garden.
So he was hiding he made like wooden boards with nails in them with large nails and he hit them all over his place so that the elephants would walk into the nails and believe it or not.
What happened is that that guy walked into the nails himself and he died of tetanus man imagine really.
So that's just that people people around here they would say it's karma.
But there is like stories that people tell that almost sounds supernatural sometimes and in some of those stories definitely the elephants they have agency and they say,
those people are people that I can trust and those people over there.
If they do some shit to me then I just fuck up their trees and push them all over and step on their fruit.
So yeah there is it's it's complex as everything right but most of the people most of the people in the countryside here.
They don't have much love for elephants to be honest they kill them.
One of the elephants that used to frequent our garden got electrocuted two or three years ago by a farmer who put like an electric wire around his entire garden and put it in the normal electrical socket like 220 volt and elephants are quite sensitive to electricity.
So the an adolescent elephant called door dang was his name got electrocuted by a farmer on the other side of the valley and that hits that hits us hard like we were really we were frustrated angry depressed sad all kinds of stuff about this story and there there is many many stories like this
they where they shoot at elephants and the elephants like die over days and days there was one instance where people put the herbicide paracot into a pineapple or into some pineapples and they poisoned an entire group of elephants like an entire group of elephants just died because of this mentality of the farmers here say this is my land I'm not going to share it.
If it was if it would be up to me those elephants could go to hell.
Yeah.
And I always I have to say getting like the impression that I get from the European farmers and their thoughts about wolves and the fact that wolves are becoming more frequent in some parts of Europe and farmers call for their outright extermination and all that the mindset is not exactly
different right it's more or less the same kind of people so when people think about like farmers in the developing world of farmers in Thailand they have many have many people have this romantic image of like the traditional rice farmer laying in his hammock.
That is not the case anymore right Thailand is developing a break next beat especially in places where there's money to be made and in our area the farmers are not that different than in other parts of the developed world right.
Oh yeah I've gotten that strong impression you know out here in Western North America you know that it's the same thing that cattle ranchers and whatnot you know that pretty much categorically opposed to the existence of credit predators period you know
Yes, and it's it's really just kind of the when I read about human elephant conflict in Africa and Southeast Asia, it seems very clear that it's basically the same cultural framework with some superficial variations.
Yeah, and it really it makes you angry and it, it creates a certain kind of how to say that how to pronounce that word misanthropy, like a natural not liking humans, like in general because you see them doing that and the firecrackers that they like man it's they do that as a preventive measure as well
So when the fruit season arrives and the durian gets large on the trees, then it's really it's like, like, it sounds like artillery. Sometimes they have those specific firecrackers and they are so loud, really, and they light them in the middle of the night so you just know you don't wake.
And you know it really it's, it's not it makes us angry, especially because it does not work now no matter how many firecrackers they like the elephants walk here anyway, right.
And just thinking about how loud that noise must be for an animal that has ears of that size.
Oh, really, it must.
Yeah, it really, it makes you lose your faith in certain parts of humanity, not that I ever had faith in those parts of humanity to begin with but even more, I lose faith.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. But now the important thing that should be the bottom line is that we do things different. And so far, it seems to work, right.
Our focus on trying to share with other animals, whether it's squirrels or monkeys or elephants to say all right we plant food but not only for us, but also for them.
Now because it's with elephants the benefit that you get is you have fucking wild elephants walking through your garden how cool is that.
And with squirrels for example like if we plant a lot of stuff that the squirrels eat, then we get to eat more squirrels in the end right.
It's a reciprocal relationship more or less we plant a lot of food for them. If we would only plan food and not hunt them then maybe their population would take overhand and they would appropriate more of the food than we would be all right with.
So it does make sense to draw a line and say all right now you're getting it's getting too much a little bit so we hunt or we trap some of the squirrels to reduce the number a little bit again and to try to like create some sort of balance as good as
possible for people in our position.
And another thing that I think is just amazing about this this lifestyle that we are experimenting with is for people who like novelty and for people who get bored very easily with like menial tasks and work in general.
So the life that we're living and the method that we're using for gardening. We rarely do the same thing. Two days in a row like in any given week like the tasks are so very right you can do so many different things.
Right.
It seems like it seems it is like that that is just the reality this lifestyle is much more rewarding and much better and much more healthy than anything that I've experienced so far in capital C civilization.
Right.
Right.
We we have now we have this whole approach where we we try to because now we're getting into other stuff that that we had in mind talking about more like actually actually creating a culture like we we try to sing to the plans or thank them or
write little songs or little poems that are going to be part of whatever kind of counterculture we're trying to create here that pay respect to the plants that say thank you to plants and animals that just appreciate their beauty.
In in terms of spirituality for us it's a little bit easier because here in Thailand and Southeast Asia in general, you do have the old original pre agricultural animistic beliefs.
And those beliefs are still alive to some extent changes of course as society changes, but for example you still have a widespread belief in the guardian spirit of the land like you would you will see in Southeast Asia.
People build like those tiny little ghost houses in front of their house they are like a little bit elevated for the spirit of the land now and we do that as well because that's the kind of
now that's the spirituality that my partner really grew up with and for me that made things a lot easier because it's not cultural appropriation.
If my partner does it right I just come along and sit there and experience and it's it's an easy way for me to develop a spirituality that goes in this direction without without having grown up in a culture that has those those forms of spirituality
if that makes any sense.
Right and it seems like this is sort of like, you know, another stumbling block for me with what anarcho primitivism has been kind of like presented to me as which I agree with your assessment that it seems like there's an evolution happening.
And I'm kind of, you know, I'm kind of referring to like the variants of it that were really prominent, you know, like a few decades ago, honestly, but it was like definitely just really hard to conceptualize it as something as really like an applied paradigm
right as something where you could concretely experiment with different ways of life and ways of being and it feels like there's all of these tremendously interesting questions to be asked both about sort of like possible human subsistence
modes and possible responses to the general unraveling of the global ecosystem you know these questions about how much biomass can we create you know how how much how many of these sort of like dynamics can we
intervene in at least to some to some extent which you know like really really basic stuff like you know that there's great there's great data on
just a fertilizing various types of like, you know, natural grasslands and stuff, massively accelerates the carbon uptake but that's like that's intensive. That's like somebody has to really be like very intimately interacting with a whole lot of land, and that is conceivable
if there's some kind of like human subsistence ecology that's taking you know the place in that in that landscape and otherwise sort of hard to imagine. Yeah. And so it's like, I think this this general you used in your, your defensive delayed return hunter
as piece, you use the term keystone species to refer to which is so often, you know, we talk about beavers that way or we talk about elephants that way you know these species that you know they do have these huge effects on their environment and I think
a lot of us are so traumatized by the kinds of effects that we've been having on our, you know, on ecosystems that it's like very hard to imagine that humans could live a life where they were having a really significant like effect a very, very like intensive form of interaction
with the ecosystem, but that it wouldn't be solely oriented towards very narrowly defined utilitarian human ends. Exactly. And it would be based on respect and a sense of like part you know connection with.
Yeah. No, I totally agree. It's a what one quick thing about anarcho primitivism in general like if if you would ask me to like summarize what what that actually means being an anarcho primitive is in as short as possible, then I would just say that we try to access any problem
and we would we just ask ourselves what would a caveman do or cave woman because we humans we've been around for a while and we have solved problems successfully otherwise we wouldn't be here.
And so the main question that we anarcho primitivist ask is how did people in the past deal with this problem. And if they didn't deal with this problem like for example you asked what did caveman do about car accidents well they don't have cars.
Well then we try not to have cars right that's the way to reduce car accidents or not like it's it's for me it is the only the only call it an ideology if you want to I'm tired of this whole discussion like is anarcho primitivism ideology or not.
If we call it an ideology it is the only ideology that there is so far that really takes into account evolution and biology and ecology, and you know the whole extent of human history, right.
And seeing that a certain lifestyle underlies our evolutionary success and that humans left to their own accord if they are not if they didn't grow up in a terrible culture, then they create like really beautiful landscapes and environments to inhabit really like we, we can be definitely a keystone
We are a keystone species for the better or the worse.
One way or the other.
Yes.
And so I really love what you said last last episode where you had this whip about the term and you said anything that produces oxygen is pretty pretty keystone right.
Yeah, I get that the term is not not the optimum thing but I guess what what I like is not Shane's phrase or Shane's term that he uses of the universal symbiont sure that is very beautiful to think about it to
to think about what what could we humans do if we would apply those gifts for something other than our own self interest right or not only our own self interest but also something else.
Yeah.
Right.
And so you probably know the story about the the honey guide bird and the huts are hunter gatherers right right where they call to this bird and the bird shows them where the honey is so that the bird gets like the wax and the humans can eat the honey.
Like this kind of this kind of symbiosis is exactly what I have in mind for the distant future for us humans right so I definitely like we had this discussion.
And so we were writing we write emails back and forth, because you kind of you're interested into the in the bio synthetic biology aspect. Right.
And yeah, personally, it's not my favorite path but at the same time I think this is so important.
People who call themselves a narco primitivist or people who would be a narco primitivist if they would use labels.
And so what what we need to do is we need to just now compromise here and there and we don't we should not do the same mistake as all the leftists and just start in fighting and argue endlessly over terminology and all that.
It's so important that we make alliances and friendships with people with people also with people who are just less opposed to modern technology than we are. Right.
Like there is definitely some scenarios where I see a case to be made for a narco primitivist who may compromise us, at least ideologically like with certain technologies for example.
Let's let's say let's just assume that something magical happens and people realize where this world where the society is headed.
Let's imagine what we could do if we could like divert funding from research and development of new drugs for big pharma to make more pills to get people even more addicted.
But to use this funding for figuring out like the basics of herbalism which plans help with which diseases how to dose them how to mix them and other with other plans like we have those laboratories we have this technology.
And we don't have to support it ourselves we don't have to take part in it ourselves but wouldn't it make sense to like use the tools for something better as long as we still have them.
Right. Like it's I just don't see the point in being like no we should abandon everything right now like that just it doesn't make sense right.
Yeah and I think that's kind of that sort of relates back to because there there certainly have been these phases of you know ideological debate within communities call them what you want you know within radical environmentalism within among
green anarchists among anarcho primitivist you know that sort of like really did mirror you know the classic like leftist sort of death spirals.
And so like it kind of gets back to this this notion that I have that I do think there is some real value in being able to identify kind of like the fundamental embodied experience of the world that all of our different
ideologies and you know labels and strategic paradigms are ultimately coming from because there's this shared thing that we possess that I think is worth really like focusing on and understanding as a basis for you know some kind of
Exactly. And so when we're before we started recording we talked about Daniel Quinn for a second and so I would like to use one of the concepts that Quinn created of the takers and the levers right where he classifies humans in
general into two categories and he says the levers are like the indigenous societies the traditional societies the hunter gatherers and however you want to call them and the takers are the city builders and the agricultural lists.
Right. And so in the in the distant past everybody was a lever. And now in the last few thousand years there was an exponential increase in takers.
Like people now levers got eradicated or assimilated forcibly and to take her society. And I know it's overly simplistic to just draw a line and says one side and the other side, but for the sake of being able to talk about those things.
A little bit shorter. It does make sense to use this basic binary to say, if you're a lever, we're on the same side.
If you are a defender of the earth, if you work for life for survival, then we are on the same side and whatever personal differences we might have in the taste.
No, it doesn't matter because we can we can sort that out later if we want to if we want to have a shot at global survival we got to make some compromises.
We cannot wait for everybody to become an anarcho primitivist or for everybody to become to start being interested in synthetic biology.
But the important thing is to create the diversity right to create different responses to this problem to this predicament and some of them might work better than others but that's kind of the point right if we all do the same thing and that
thing doesn't work then we're fucked. But if we do all kinds of different things, then there is just a much better chance that some of them will make it through if that makes any sense.
And that is such a fundamental to me that's like a sort of there's this very interesting that that point is I think fundamental and there's not really any.
And once you say it out loud it's like well that's obviously true. It's not like we have some rich legacy of case studies to draw upon where we confronted a similar crisis to like this and some things worked and some things didn't.
So we can empirically say you know okay strategies X through Y are guaranteed successes or whatever so you know but people are what I find so often is that people are temperamentally drawn to a particular set of approaches or or whatever and then that personal
attraction translates into a really strong certainty that those approaches are the only ones that are going to be successful you know and I'm like run with it you know it's obviously worth trying if it's something that appeals to a bunch of people but that
is sort of like basic epistemic humility or whatever like acknowledging that you know that that attraction is there because of the kind of mind one possesses and that we can only know what works once we know what works.
Exactly. No, I think a lot of like you talked about this at great length in the last few episodes. The many environmentalists and I guess most anarcho primitive is they have this like deep felt aversion towards this approach, synthetic biology and all that
like people many people in my social sphere whatever they think that humans shouldn't have any agency in those things. And to me it seems that is basic denial of reality or not because we will influence our ecosystem one way or the other
no matter if we are takers or leavers, hunter gatherers or civilized people or if we employ some technology or no modern advanced technology at all right. And even if we use some forms of technology that get criticized by anarcho primitive is like it doesn't
necessarily mean that it's all bad. If you apply the precautionary principle for example the what is it the Native Americans I don't remember which culture they have this thing the seventh generation principle or whatever.
You have to think about how it will affect seven generations down the road. And also just if you're here to the voices of other animals if you listen to the voices of other animals and the rivers and the mountains and if you if you include them into your considerations.
And you are able to make like some kind of low tech approach to this synthetic biology stuff. I don't see any. I don't see any problem with that I wouldn't I wouldn't necessarily try it myself simply because I have other interest but it's also.
Now I'm not categorically opposed to it right because I have to ask very quick.
So you talked a little bit about it like I'm, I don't know to what extent I will go into the details of this whole thing with synthetic biology but so you talked about like genetically changing organisms but not like the reductionist way right so you don't use the
CRISPR-Cas9 or whatever it is called but you do something with horizontal gene transfer do I understand that right like could you explain just a short what how would that look like in practice.
Are there any any experiments in this direction like how would you change an organism on the genetic level without using like super fancy laboratory technology.
Well yeah so there's I I think I'm going to do a whole episode about this and I'm not going to do.
Okay.
A great job of I always you know what's so funny is that I always find that I can often if I go through the process of writing or podcasting in some fashion or another articulating something really complex where there's like this.
You know this massive torrent of technical language or whatever after that.
I'm really adept at being at being like here's three sentences that more.
In what took me three hours to say the first time around but yeah but there is this so there is kind of this like paradigm shift that's happening in.
Biology in general and just an evolutionary biology and then likewise in the synthetic biology where people are just starting to understand more and more that the differences between organisms have less to do with.
The actual you know complement of genes that they possess and more just what's done with those genes you know so there's kind of been this sense that on some level the possibilities.
Have been sort of maxed out as far as just taking a gene from one organism and throwing it into the genome of another.
Like we really as far as like complex developmental processes that characterize life go that's not going to get you anywhere you know if like if all you want is to have like a species of algae that produces this one protein that otherwise occurs in sunflowers or whatever.
You can do stuff like that but you can't but as far as life in its capacity to take on really interesting forms or behave in very interesting ways or whatever that stuff is like not either you're never going to like just toss a few genes into you know some species of algae
and get it to act like a plant or to you know be able to like respond to its environment in the way that a fungus can or you know whatever and so there's more and more this emphasis on just kind of basically subjecting organisms to novel conditions to just allow them to.
To adapt rapidly on their own in which case the the sort of like the specialized technology that allows you to assess like we know what what.
RNA transcripts or proteins or other biomolecules is this organism generating at what quantities at what points in its development like.
The specialized technology allows you to understand what's happening a lot better and therefore to like segregate lineages in different ways and stuff like that.
But there's kind of there's kind of like a loss of faith I would say among a lot of people doing that kind of work in really how far just like gene like tossing genes from one organism into another will take people but then but then also in some cases what they're doing is they'll do like.
Some sort of they'll they will do that they'll do like an initial phase of genetic engineering per se of horizontal transfer which is happening all the time around us anyway but then there will be like a subsequent phase of sort of like laboratory guided evolution where they're.
perturbing the environment and that's like where the real magic is sort of happening in some cases so at some point if we could develop a way to talk let's say with other beings about not what genes were in them but what they did with those genes I think we would.
Yeah, how much further along on this kind of like very hypothetical journey of being the sort of multi species complex where we can like have some level of co evolution happening at these sort of like really fundamental, you know, evolutionary developmental levels basically yes.
And if the organism in question. If you respect the organism in question that already changes the entire game I guess.
Because so far everything happens under now motivations of profit maximization and all that like basic just get the most out of it as possible in the shortest amount of time.
Just make money, you know, and I think that if you would switch like the underlying motivations that would already be a lot more promising, right.
Well, yeah.
I mean, and I think that's like there is this minority tendency that is kind of the so that the last episode that I made I quoted this guy Michael Levin quite a bit.
Who's kind of you know I mean he's basically like he says at the beginning of one of the papers that I quoted that you know he's he's basically providing a scientific framework for a kind of panpsychism or animism or whatever you know he's saying that everything has a certain kind of consciousness and that consciousness is how life is the source of life to begin with right.
And he is a synthetic biologist you know he he experiments with organisms but he's very much coming from this perspective, kind of like Shane's thing of being the universal symbiont.
He seems much more interested in this sort of like, I would say that it seems like an act of reverence like he's not he's not just like well how do we make pharmaceuticals.
He's like, how do we sort of maximize these tendencies towards ever greater diversity complexity and awareness that life has been manifesting all along.
A very, very different sort of way of approaching.
Yeah. Yeah, yeah, but I mean, I guess it is true like in a more general sense that, like we said before now we humans we can, we can carefully apply our gifts, because we have this weird brain of ours for the better or the worse.
So why not try to use our gifts to create, you know, a more abundant world, because a more abundant word like even if we're circling back to the delayed return hunter gatherers who plant some crops.
Like if you create an environment that has more flowers and fruits that does not only benefit humans, right.
But it benefits everybody around you and if you if you create a system in which not all the spoils of the land have to go to one single species.
But not like the shifting cultivators do right they create this food for us this giant food for us and they say all right but the surplus is not only for us, because what would we do with all that fruit.
So we take what we want. And the rest is just there for the taking whoever is hungry animal, not whatever animal is is hungry they can just go there and eat some of it as well.
Right.
And so I just I just think that there is it's, I like to believe that it is two different approaches to the same goal more or less right.
On one hand, you have like the synthetic biology guy who discovered his kind of how do you call it panpsychism or like enemies.
And on the other side you have people like me right who that is something very strange by the way like ever since I've discovered anarcho primitivism and by extension just indigenous people right.
Because I got to say that right quick because it's so so important and so true. I think it was David Graeber right who said that a lot of what anarchy lacks in theory is actually there but it's just like the ethnological and anthropological literature right.
So I think the most powerful works for anarcho primitivism are not the writings by John Zertsam, but no disrespect to the guy right but just the ethnographies like Colin Turnbull's forest people what we were talking about.
Another another one.
I'm not sure if you know this book do you know The Falling Sky by Davi Kopenawa words of a Yanomami shaman.
Oh, no, I know I don't I know I know of the book but no.
Okay, man. Holy shit what a book that was really a game changer for me like if you ever have the time, not only you but every person who might be listening to this and who might have some interest in what I'm saying here.
There is this amazing book called The Falling Sky, which is basically it is written by an indigenous person by Davi Kopenawa who is very famous indigenous rights activist for the Yanomami.
He starred in several movies as well if somebody knows the movie Embrace of the Serpent, the David Kopenawa and the Yanomami they made their own movie a few years ago it's called Our Ultima Foresta in Portuguese and it's called The Last Forest in English it's on it's on Netflix and anyway
Davi Kopenawa has a role in this movie as well.
So Davi Kopenawa is friends with this anthropologist whose name is Bruce Albert if I remember it right. So they sat down together many, many times over many years and Albert just recorded the stuff that Kopenawa told him.
And he transcribed it and translated it and he edited it into this massive book, which is basically a one on one translation of just this indigenous shaman was just talking about his beliefs and his life and his childhood and his teenage years and the time when he went to work for the white people.
And then later the time when he visited the United Nations in New York and gave like a little speech on behalf of the indigenous population of the Amazon and his commentary on our society on civilization in general it is.
I really enjoy it if you ever look for a book to read is the beginning is a little bit cumbersome if that's the right word because he did he like he explains a great great detail the specifics of the Yanomami spiritual belief.
And I think, like, many people they are put off by this first chapter or two and they say this is too boring. But it's it now if you're not super interested in what exactly they believe in just push through.
Later in the book it gets really good. So I just wanted to recommend this book. Now I forgot why I recommend this book.
Well, I wanted to say, because I don't have like a rigid system, but I tend to try for as much as I'm, I feel like I'm known for long episodes. I try to keep them like three hours is sort of a rough guide for like, you know, somewhere around a maximum, which we're
We're approaching pretty soon here.
Shit, or actually, no, no, no, no, no, no, we have exceeded, but it's a rough guide, it's a rough guide because there's there is something I still really want to ask about which is just because I agree.
By the way, I'm going to I'm going to second what you essentially just said, which is that I really strongly think that there's something irreducible and very valuable to be gained from rather than reading any like synthesis or like heavy like
Theoretical perspective, you know, even if it's integrating a bunch of anthropological data, it's just so valuable to actually read a straight up ethnography or two, and just get that like way more kind of like detailed, you know, just sort of like, like, obviously
Insert the introduction to every goddamn ethnography ever, you know, like, of course, people are bringing interpretation into their work, but, but, you know, to just get like a less interpretive and more somewhat straightforward account of the way different people live.
It has had, it has, I think, very often a much greater impact on people's perceptions than theoretical debate or whatever.
And, and this book, it can have this effect on people because it's really it's also the style of writing is very close to the way that David Copernabas talks originally in his language, so it also feels really authentic.
And I remembered why I started talking about this right quick. Ever since I've started reading like more about indigenous people and about their societies and about the lifestyle that they live, I have noticed that I have just a lower intellectual interest in anything that is like too
alienated and abstract or not in the words of McGill Christ that is too left hemisphere. And I don't think it's like a lower intellect per se that I have as a result, but I just think that there are more balanced applications.
If that makes any sense. So the whole synthetic biology to come back to this topic. It just seems like, no, it just seems like for me personally, with the experiences that I made, it seems like a little bit too much for me.
No, and I if you read about hunter gatherers and you read about the lifestyle that they have. And again, I'm not romanticizing not saying it's perfect. There's plenty of shit happening and there's plenty of suffering as well.
But overall they lead pretty decent lives compared to with what we have. And they are able to do so without all the abstraction and all the science and all the mathematics and the statistics and all that other stuff that we tend to exclude into our
considerations right now and I saw because I was always I was always easily bored with this kind of stuff. It felt like a justification now to say all right, then I just don't have to go too deep into the abstract stuff.
Because if you look at it like in the end it's not not really necessary to live a good life and to be a functioning part of the ecosystem that you're embedded in right.
Sure. Yeah. And you know, but it's like it is a there is like a question of individual difference here. Because I know for me it's like a it's kind of like my candy right like I'm not I'm not addicted to television.
You know, I don't I don't care what's happening on season 12 of what the fuck ever. But, but I do like really just kind of like it's, you know, it really like is this thrilling realm for me.
Also, for me, and I understand that this is definitely not everybody's experience but it's kind of like, for me, my path of spiritual exploration in my scientific path are very entwined right and it's a way for me to kind of, I guess I would say,
inhabit a kind of rigor or a kind of exertion that one might also get from say like staying up all night drumming and dancing.
Yes, fasting for a few days on top of a mountain where you know you're kind of like you're demanding something very intensive of yourself and sort of like interacting with the boundaries of your of your abilities and your capacity for comprehension.
And then I and then I have these moments of great breakthrough or the sense of communion with, with reality right you know, and that's something that the some kind of path like that I think is useful in my case science is what is most accessible for me.
And that makes perfect sense right I think my my own my younger brother he's in a similar situation as you he says similar things about the whole science thing, as you just said.
And I just think, yeah, as you said it boils down to like personal preference for what do you like in life right and personally I've just arrived at the point where just nothing makes as much sense as the indigenous perspective right
in the books about I don't know what. And if I if I like, listen to an interview with an indigenous person I read a book about indigenous person where they are quoted at length.
Then I'm like, yes, that's it. Now that's, that's the stuff that I can really identify with. It's not too theoretical it's not too complicated it's not too to left brain or it doesn't contain any of those annoying biases that are not that
I don't want to debate this culture. Like one thing that I got to talk about right quick I promise to make it short. But like this stuff that really bothers me as an anarcho primitivist is that people write books, hundreds and hundreds of pages about how bad civilization
is and how it fucks everything up and then in the last chapter they're like, so let's create a new civilization right and I'm always like no.
And if it clearly doesn't work like what makes you think that you will come up with the one civilization that will be sustainable. Right.
Every civilization that has ever existed has collapsed. So, maybe we should try something else or not like, instead of looking at or how can we create a new civilization.
Maybe we just leave this concept of civilization behind us. And I'm talking about like the definition of civilization among its etymology, like building cities and agriculture and state formation and all that.
Like, hearing hearing people talk about new civilizations. It's like the thing that you said in one of the episodes the definition of insanity is to do the same thing twice and expect different results.
A quote that is attributed to Einstein, but I couldn't verify if he was really the guy who said it. But the point is, if all civilizations failed, then let's not build another one.
Let's try something else entirely because after all we humans, we are apes and not termites or ants.
Right. And so we maybe we shouldn't all try to imitate termites and ants. Maybe there is complexity to be found outside of a mass society.
You know, and we are just because we were born in a mass society, we cannot imagine anything else and it does bias our thinking to some extent or another.
But from from my perspective, not channeling the anarcho primitive is I think what we should try is something different than civilization. Right.
And I would say, I'm just riffing on that a little bit. I have this like really significant fear that one of the conceivable evolutionary paths before us.
Is that, you know, essentially we do become so like so lacking in the temperaments that resist domination and resist hyper compartmentalized specialized alienated labor in this hyper complex system that we actually really do kind of
have the temperaments of say like, you know, social insects like leaf cutter and search termites or whatever. Right. Where, you know, at some point in that evolution, there were probably like dominance signals that were exchanged.
You still see that in naked mole rats, you know, the only like you social mammal, right, you know, where they they require the dominance behaviors of the queen in order to not go through puberty and to stay in these kind of like highly subordinated
highly specialized sort of like, you know, cog in the machinery of their mass society roles or whatever. And, you know, but at some point in that evolutionary trajectory, it's like the dominance interaction kind of ceases and the sense of rejection of
that subordination sort of goes away, you know, I think that's like where a lot of social insects are at. And the way that I see people kind of like this sort of like really profound degree of resignation that I feel like I'm witnessing in
younger people or just in people who I don't know, you know, like, like that I'm just seeing right now actually like, yeah, pretty demographically general is actually like really making me speculate that week that that is like one totally
conceivable outcome of our current path is to just like truly lose our humanity.
Yeah, yeah. No, I totally agree. And I do think that the potential for a ship that could happen if we go down that road is enormous really like, if we take it to the extreme night could basically lead to like a little bit like factory farm like
conditions or not. And it's we already see the beginning of that right we already see the erosion of like individual differences between humans. Any other than just I listen to hip hop and you listen to punk or whatever
but like exactly people are becoming more and more the same. And I think it was John Gaudy who said that complex societies require simple individuals to hear about that.
It's a good way to put it in my right in my opinion, but like the I definitely agree like the, if we continue to go down that path, it's perfectly possible that this is happening that this will happen.
But we should try our best to avoid that or not like I have a really bad feeling I don't want to live in a society like that I want to be free and wild or whatever else you want to call it right I want to roll in the landscape and have autonomy.
So maybe yeah maybe it boils down to those biological differences maybe the very extreme authoritarians would feel more comfortable in a society like that, because it is important to point out right that all of those people were more on the
authoritarian side it's not like they all want to become alpha males but they are they are just comfortable in a hierarchy as long as there's somebody beneath them.
And if that's given, then they they don't care they don't care about the other injustices as long as there's somebody that is worse off than them right and I think that is important to not to point out in this in this way because.
Yeah, because it can lead to really weird and really fucked up societies down the road, if you think in evolutionary terms and over like evolutionary time scales.
I don't I don't think it's the right direction for us and I think that recent human evolution like the past few million years, two or three million years have shown that without this dominant culture without civilization we would not even move in that direction.
Right, we would have leveling mechanisms and like subsistence molds and cultural material conditions surrounding us that just don't facilitate the creation of societies like that right.
Right, right. I mean that that's the thing that is so unique about humanity is that we managed to pull off the sort of like very coordinated group behavior that is characteristic of societies like, you know, leave cutter ants and stuff you know without.
Yeah, but what while maintaining tremendous individual freedom and that's a very, that's, that's a very remarkable I think that's an under examined realm of evolutionary novelty that the very fact that we have like group life but with pair bonding and all that stuff.
You know, it's like, yeah, very, very distinct mode of evolution and.
Yes. Yeah, so.
And also, yeah, and also the ability to just shift around and experiment a little bit. Right, like we were talking about before that it doesn't have to be an either or like even when it comes to stuff like using technology like in an aqua primitive isn't as the big discussion, raging on forever about metal tools.
And this all this nonsense is all right I'm going to scavenge metal yes but I'm not going to produce it right I'm not going to cut down forest to produce charcoal to make more of that stuff.
But it's also not like, as soon as you start using metal tools then you will start building civilizations eventually because if you look at people like the yanomami.
They use metal tools every fucking day and they don't start agriculture they don't start deforestation they don't cut down their forest any more than they really have to know so it's not.
It's not everything is set in stone right not everything is just an either or right.
That might be a pre there is a lot more that I really do want to talk about but I'm feeling like from the listeners perspective we should probably maybe call this a day for now and yeah you can just have another conversation another time what do you think.
Oh yeah of course man I've wasted so much time talking about boarding school and my own personal history that we could have spent talking about future possibilities for the human species and all that.
But yeah sure I mean I'm I don't I didn't even look at the clock but three three hours plus is definitely a lot so I'm I agree man.
I would be up for like doing a follow up whenever there's anything else that there are a few other things that I think would be interesting also just to the general audience of this podcast.
But at the same time I totally agree we should not overwhelm people and switch around too much between different topics because we covered a great deal of ground right and our conversation here.
Yeah we got we got great stuff the the thing that the one thing that really stands out that I was thinking to talk about is like to go into more detail about.
Like the ethnographic record of shifting cultivators you know like we didn't we didn't do much of that and that's too bad.
But we got some great stuff I mean it'll be it'll be a good episode.
I hope so.
All right.