Title: Myth Science Power
Episode #: 54
Episode ID: 11718930
Source: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/11718930-myth-science-power.mp3
------------------------------------------------------------

=== EPISODE METADATA ===
Generated: 2026-01-12 01:02:06
Episode ID: 15772736
MP3 File: 15772736-how-to-tell-if-someone-is-hitting-you.mp3
Title: How to Tell If Someone Is Hitting You
Podcast/Artist: World Tree Center for Transformative Politics and Global Survival
Album/Series: Fight Like An Animal
Source URL: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/15772736-how-to-tell-if-someone-is-hitting-you.mp3
========================
What is the highest technique you hope to achieve?
You have no technique.
Very good.
What are your thoughts when facing the opponent?
They don't know.
Greetings, friends.
I'm Arnold Schroeder, and this is Fight Like an Animal.
Find episode bibliographies and other texts at againsttheinternet.com.
And if you'd like to support this work materially, please check out patreon.com-biological-singularity.
A brief note both on a presentation of this particular episode, but a project update in general.
You might notice that I'm not my typically vehement self this time around.
And that is because I am once again experiencing catastrophic anemia and in and out of the hospital.
And I've never really elaborated on my current medical status and I think anything like a sort of like definitive way before
and briefly, I just thought I would actually explain why I am sometimes out of commission
and whether and to what extent it's clear that that's ever going to really cease to be the case.
When I received a kidney transplant in the summer of 2021, along with that kidney,
most likely came a disease called Parvovirus, which most people are familiar with from dogs,
but does in fact afflict humans.
It's also quite possible that I was already that I already had Parvovirus and it was just the immunosuppression from from the post transplant
medication that sort of liberated the Parvovirus and allowed it to run free.
It produces both a radical drop in white blood cell counts, so a decline in immune function as well as catastrophic anemia.
Parvo cases typically do resolve at some point in immunosuppressed patients,
but I am a little bit of an outlier already and how long mine has persisted and how intense it's been.
And so there are no guarantees as with everything else in life,
but it's at least conceivable that one of these times that I'm in and out of the hospital for a while will in fact be the last.
And that is mostly not why I haven't been podcasting as rapidly as was previously the case.
It is mostly simply because I've been very focused on writing and as I've said before,
I really do consider writing to be this developmental process that I'm deliberately subjecting myself to.
And once again, as with health, there are just no guarantees about how long that takes or what its outcomes are likely to be.
And I'm kind of in this perpetual state of being really thrilled by the thresholds I feel like I'm crossing and the capacities I believe myself to be gaining.
But you know, I guess suppose it's always conceivable that I'll look at the work I'm doing right now in six months or so and loathe it
and feel like it all needs to be rewritten once again. I don't know.
But yeah, so there's also just a huge, huge amount of work that I've done in the past, let's say a year or so,
that I haven't translated into any output, any podcast or anything like that.
And a lot of it will at some point comprise episodes of fight like an animal.
So this episode today is really, one could perhaps argue that this is where we should have started.
There's a very meaningful sense in which this is the beginning.
So fight like an animal didn't start at the beginning, but here at episode 77 or 8 or whatever this is going to be,
we're finally getting around to the beginning.
So one of the most fundamental, if not the most fundamental question that any politics must have a concrete
and coherent answer to in order to make any claim towards to coherence whatsoever is the question of how the capacity
for aggression and coercion should be distributed within a given society.
And a politics most likewise also answer the question of how to attain that state of affairs.
So in other words, not only the telos of aggression,
not only how it should be distributed in the final vision of a society that a politics is pursuing,
but also within the circumstances we find ourselves in now what the role of aggression and coercion
in creating that final aggression, aggressive telos should be.
And this is something that actually to a truly breathtaking degree, we really lack a rich set of concrete
and at least semi-coherent sort of stories about within our extant political traditions.
We can kind of see a little bit of a parallel here with other types of science,
where the really fundamental questions, the question of what something fundamentally is, for instance,
so often go unanswered in so many scientific traditions in favor of an answer to what the very detailed properties
of something are. We can talk about all of the really, really esoteric dynamics of life
without ever really getting around to understanding what life is or whatever.
I really do see a parallel here. I think that aggression and coercion are so fundamentally related to power
that any theory of power that doesn't deeply have a fundamental orientation to
and a really robust answer to questions concerning aggression and coercion
just can't possibly make any sense. And mostly that we just don't find.
We just don't really find clear definitive theories about that.
And so like we could see, for instance, in the fairly recent wave of conversations about defunding
and or abolishing the police that happened in 2020, in particular in the wake of the killing
of George Floyd by the Minneapolis police, we saw this sort of like what we have instead
of coherent answers to questions concerning aggression is a great illustration of how frames function
in political discourse, right? So a frame is a way, you know, a system of invoking
and amplifying certain variables at the expense of others.
It tells us what to pay attention to, but then implicitly what not to pay attention to.
And what we saw over and over again is that people who are arguing for defunding or abolishing the police
would be met with the question, okay, but then who is going to protect me and the people I love
from all the monstrous things that people do in fact do.
But instead of really answering that question, people would just reframe the dialogue.
And they would tend to start talking about how people tend to do less of the horrible things that they do
when, for instance, they're less subject to poverty, right? Things like that they would talk about
or, you know, they would talk about how the crimes being committed by corporations, you know,
how corporations steal more from their employees in the form of payroll theft
than people steal from corporations and the police simply don't prosecute that, things like that.
But there does need to be an answer to this question. It is in fact fundamental.
And the answer to the question that we are going to present here that is a central characteristic
of an egalitarian society in my reckoning, who will protect us from the rapacious tendencies
of whoever happens to be wielding violence most successfully in a given place and time is we will.
And if the objection to that answer is that that sounds scary and difficult and it might not succeed,
this is where it has to be pointed out that we've already failed, that the society we're living in
is in fact one in which the people who have just managed to wield the greatest capacity for violence
and coercion are the ones who get to tell the rest of us what to do. That's what a state is.
And this can be really hard for people to understand because dominant hierarchy elicits
unintegrated thinking because reasoning is embodied and being subjugated elicits a distinct
physiology and the physiology of subordination doesn't really do wonders for our ability to think straight.
And so people are to a really terrifying, creepy degree, unaware, unable to see the coercion
that pervades everyday life, unable to engage in basic forms of reasoning about things like
property only having meaning if violence is at least being threatened to secure exclusive access
to property for the people who own it. Things like that, things that are trivially obvious,
just don't really either logically or psychologically register for a lot of people.
So in having any of these conversations about the role of coercion and aggression in a society,
we have to confront all of these barriers that have been put up by the fact that in dominance hierarchies,
those who dominate not only prevent those they subordinate from fighting back,
from reciprocating their aggression, but they tend to prevent people from even acknowledging
that the aggression and coercion is occurring because that in itself,
the acknowledgement of domination constitutes a threat to those who dominate.
So we do have to wade through a great deal of unintegrated thinking in really chaotic frames
and metaphors that are just inherently profoundly misleading.
So it's a little bit of an uphill battle, but again, this really is where any coherent,
you know, integrated political framework kind of has to start. We have to answer these questions.
Another consequence real quick that I would note of this unintegrated thinking that the physiology of subordination elicits
is this real contradictory assessment of human nature and, you know, like the characterization of a given society.
So if one begins to talk about designing a society other than the one we inhabit,
a society of like more a more rational benevolent society,
then apologists for this current system will almost immediately invoke the darkness of human nature.
And they'll just say like, oh, you know, like some version of, oh, you think everybody's just going to hold hands and get along,
but actually it's a jungle out there, blah, blah, blah, right.
But then the moment that one points out the domination violence and coercion that is central to this society,
the story suddenly changes and it's not such a jungle out there after all.
And we're told about how we actually do in fact write that not only is a rational benevolent society possible,
but we're in fact living in one right this very moment.
Look at that. So, you know, presto change, things like that are good examples of how incapable of coherent thought
living in dominance hierarchy makes us how huge of an uphill battle that makes talking about these kinds of things.
And what that also implies as I think is kind of often the case for a lot of the sort of core premises of revolutionary biology,
sort of like the core theses that we articulate in this podcast is that articulating a coherent,
biologically integrated theory of aggression and coercion and its role in a society,
you know, we can do it in a way that feels pretty technical or pretty conceptually dazzling,
but a lot of the process really is just divesting ourselves of these incoherent ways of thinking.
And so there is a way that coming to a reasonable set of conclusions about these subjects starts to feel a lot like just sort of common sense
and like stating some actually pretty trivially obvious truths.
But it's just, it's more of a process of divesting ourselves of an elaborate, chaotic and confused process of reasoning
rather than developing some like really cool, sophisticated, conceptually dazzling insights or whatever.
I know that your snake style is terrific, but my monk technique can kill snakes.
Kind of where we start, where we diverge, where we start is also where we diverge from most other ways of trying to account for these questions
is that, you know, typically we see in frames like liberalism and leftism and to a pretty large extent anarchism,
all of these sort of, these frames that still kind of inhabit this enlightenment notion of disembodied rationality.
We see this consistent aversion to acknowledging that there even is such a thing as the biology of domination
and the biology of dominance hierarchy, at least within the human species.
But then we'll also see, alternately, if people are going to talk about biology, it then becomes an argument about what human nature is fundamentally like
with the assumption that it's invariant, right?
So it becomes a question of like using biological arguments often with a heavy, heavy dose of metaphor and, you know, kind of like abstract reasoning
rather than any like biological detail to answer these really broad questions about, you know, are people fundamentally hierarchical
or egalitarian, cooperative or competitive, which aren't the same question at all and so on and so forth.
Right. And so where we're starting is with this question with this assumption, which seems trivially obvious that there is indeed a biology of domination and coercion,
a biology of dominance hierarchy, which the human species possesses, and that there is a biology of other types of social behavior and other social forms.
And the question for people like us, who understand that dominance hierarchy implies ecological collapse and is also just happens to be a really miserable way to live.
The question is how to elicit or how do you engage with the biology of social forms and social behaviors that are beneficial as opposed to adverse desirable as opposed to implausible and untenable.
How to elicit or engage the biology of egalitarianism as opposed to at the expense of the biology of dominance hierarchy.
And of course, one of the other problems that we, you know, come against pretty quickly when evaluating the existing landscape of descriptions of humans as hierarchical or egalitarian or whatever
is that these states, these paradigms are very rarely all that clearly defined and a lot of really actually conceptually very distinct realities tend to be conflated
or alternatively things that are fundamentally logically related tend to be thought of as disparate.
And so, you know, before we go any further, we should disavow the long proud tradition of politics that say, you know, the political theory that say generates hundreds of pages of text about the right left divide without ever defining it or whatever.
And we should just try to define a dominant hierarchy, even though the fact that we have to do that at all is a truly profound testimony to how alienated from ourselves and from embodied reality we have become.
This is something that no other animal struggles to understand.
And this, this really is a testimony to the ways in which abstraction, abstract thought and language for as remarkable of tools as they are, can are things that are very easy to become lost in right and to obscure realities that are just very intuitive.
We become attached to the symbolic associations we have with a given reality to a degree where we no longer experience or comprehend the physical reality associated with something.
So let's describe a dominant hierarchy. Let's say what it is.
As Christopher Boehm in his book Hierarchy in the Forest, The Evolution of Egalitarian Behavior says, you know, no other field biologists unencumbered by all of the different sort of like self descriptions or political ideologies associated with a given social form.
No field biologists would really get all that confused about whether or not they're witnessing a dominance hierarchy. They would say they would, as he says, simply assess the relative presence or absence of social dominance behaviors and then place the given species on a continuum between these two political poles of despotism and egalitarianism.
And so, you know, a biologist goes out and looks for these specific dominance behaviors and what are they? Well, you can tell that you are in a dominance hierarchy when someone gets to hit you and you don't get to hit them back.
A dominance hierarchy is characterized by an asymmetry of aggression. And no, it doesn't really matter what the person hitting you says about why they're hitting you. It doesn't matter if they say it's for equality or it's for the liberation of humanity or the end of history or the
transfiguration of the world into a glorious new epoch defined by liberation and beauty and humanities, you know, the furtherance of the human destiny to someday journey into the stars or whatever. It doesn't matter.
A society is characterized by dominance hierarchy to the extent to which aggression and coercion is present in that society and that aggression and coercion is asymmetrically distributed.
Disproportionately, the capacity for that aggression and coercion exists in some people and is applied to others. That's it.
In defining the dominance, in describing the history of the dominance concept and defining dominance hierarchy in the book Sociobiology, Wilson describes it as the set of sustained aggressive submissive relations within a society.
And that in itself is perfectly sufficient. We wouldn't actually require that that set of sustained aggressive submissive interactions be about anything or have any particular function in order for a society to qualify as a dominance hierarchy.
We don't really see any cases where those aggressive submissive interactions occur, unless there's some material incentive. The asymmetry of aggression exists to enforce in practice an asymmetry of access to resources and opportunities.
And so this has been described. There is a very agonizing, very tedious literature or sort of like literary tradition within certain strains of egalitarian politics that seeks to negate the claims that biologists make about the hierarchies that they observe.
And this is something I don't want to wade into to any great extent, because it really is a lot of agonizing incipidity.
But, you know, let's just suffice it to say that this dynamic has been very extensively documented in a very large number of species. And if you do want to get some sense, like if you kind of want to look an inventory of hierarchical social forms across a great many taxa from vertebrates to invertebrates, you know, across a very wide range of species.
Wilson's Sociobiology is a great book for that. So, you know, you can see dominance hierarchies and everything from social insects to deer to horses to primates and so on, describing both the form that the asymmetrical aggression takes.
And then the, you know, like sort of like ritualized institutionalized set of sustained aggressive submissive interactions, like what form that takes, and then the asymmetry of resources or opportunities that that asymmetry of aggression instantiates and allows for.
And so one of the things that one might note about this definition of dominance hierarchy is that it's not just how aggressive a species is, right, that it's, there's this very, very widespread tendency, as I said, to conflate things that are fundamentally disparate in dialogues about dominance hierarchy that are sort of biologically illiterate.
And one of the primary one of the primary conflations that occurs is between hierarchy and aggression. So these are not the same things. We also see a lot of times in which aggression or hierarchy is counterposed to cooperation.
Or, you know, or like competition is conflated with hierarchy and therefore counterposed to cooperation that doesn't make any sense. As I've said before, on this podcast, a mass invasion, Hitler invading Poland was this act of mass cooperation.
Social, you know, you social insects, which are some of the most hierarchical species in the world are characterized by the intensive infrastructure that they collectively build by the mass cooperative divisions of labor that characterize their society.
And so it's always always going to be a question of the distribution of aggression and the capacity, therefore, in a society. And so a long time ago, people studying a variety of species started to come up with indices with with an index of the degree to which a society can be characterized as a dominance hierarchy.
And so a society that the index produces, you know, I mean, there's some complicated math here. There's an infinite sum involved in all that good stuff. But like what they're measuring is actually quite straightforward.
There's the output, the numerical output of an index of how hierarchical society is can range from zero to one. So one is a perfectly hierarchical society if that's the terminology we want to use.
And zero would be a perfectly egalitarian society. And any degree of aggression could be occurring in that society. This species could do nothing but fight. And that would have no bearing on whether it was a zero or a one or some number in between in the hierarchical index.
So a species would receive a one a perfectly hierarchical society if a given if it was characterized by a linear dominance hierarchy, which means that there would be one individual at the top of the hierarchy who dominated all other individuals.
So a linear dominance hierarchy, a perfectly hierarchical society is one in which individual a dominates individual B. And if B dominates C, then so does a right so you can sort of like schematize the configuration of dominance relations in a straight line.
But then a less perfectly hierarchical society might be one in which a dominates B and B dominates C, but C dominates a so it produces sort of like a triangular schematic if you could visualize that you know you draw a line from a to B, and from B to C, but then from C to a to indicate the direction to which aggression in which aggression is being exercised from whom and to whom.
And then a society with a hierarchical index of zero would be a society in which either aggression is always reciprocated or it could even be where there are somewhat stable aggressive submissive interactions, but every individual would be dominating an equal number of other individuals, either
one of those forms which could be very, very different would satisfy the criteria of an egalitarian society in this strict sense in which that metric reckons hierarchy and egalitarianism.
And of course, if one's intention is to inhabit a society in which relations of domination do not prevail, then only one of those conditions is sufficient to, you know, meet the objective and that would be a society in which any aggression any attempts at domination of any individual or coalition towards any other individual
or coalition would be reciprocated. People wouldn't allow themselves to be dominated. And then, of course, in reality, what we see is that because alliance formation is so central to the acquisition of the ability to coerce others that, you know, classes essentially form in both other
species and of course in humans, you see this in chimpanzees and whatnot, where you might have a small coalition at the very top, and then a sort of subordinate class below them, but above yet another subordinate class, you know, you might have like three in a lot of other
non-human species, you might have like three or four kind of distinct hierarchical echelons. And of course in humans, it's really sort of hard to say how many different echelons of a hierarchy exist, especially in such a fabulously complex hierarchy as the ones we inhabit in technological mass societies.
You know, where even somebody who is really, really low in hierarchical status can still kind of, you know, somebody who works the absolute like the absolute lowest paying jobs and is therefore however much we may employ all these frames and all these kinds of rhetoric to obscure this fact
subject to, if not outright aggression, at least the threat of aggression on behalf of many, many other members of society, you know, if you can't afford to pay rent, what that ultimately means is that a man with a big stick will come and hit you over the head if you try to inhabit a place where you haven't worked for somebody in order to pay for
and what it means to work for somebody in order to pay for a place is that people have used aggression to claim all the world's resources so that you have to work for them, you know, in order to gain the resources to give back to them in order to even have a place here on earth that you're allowed to be.
But even a person like that can call the police on a homeless person who's sleeping on their doorstep, and the man with the big stick will come and beat them over the head, right.
And so, you know, there can be like these sort of the the dominance concept can be elaborated into classes into big alliances of individuals who direct aggression down the hierarchy towards other classes of individuals.
But to give some sense of the different, like sort of configurations to disentangle the notion of aggression and the notion of hierarchy conceptually a little bit.
Let's note a few different configurations that don't meet the common expectations that we tend to have when we are thinking that way, which by the way I would note, all seem kind of just based on the moral and psychological valence that I give.
And that's what we have inside of conditions has right so I think we really just tend to conflate hierarchy and aggression or egalitarianism and cooperation because they kind of both they register as benevolent or nice they make us feel warm and fuzzy or kind of like bad and like the world is dangerous and threatening.
And that's really the basis for the conflation rather than any inherent logical, you know, continuity between those notions.
For instance, and I have mentioned this at other points in the podcast, a society can have a Wild West phase, which we would characterize as a high aggression, low hierarchy phase.
So that would just look like a society in which there's a lot of violence, but no individual and no coalition has really kind of monopolized the capacity for violence and so people do in fact kill each other all the time.
They team up with other people to get revenge on those people and so on and so forth and there's, there's a lot of violence happening, but there's nobody who can plausibly exercise such a great degree of coercion and violence against everybody else that somebody can't plausibly enlist a sufficient coalition with enough of a capacity for aggression to reciprocate that aggression.
You know, somebody might have a little bit of power in a social configuration, but it's like they've got 10 or 15 or even 100 guys around them who are willing to fight with them.
And it's totally plausible for somebody else to get 10 or 15 or even 100 guys to go after them if that person is using that capacity for violence to attempt to dominate them.
Societies can likewise have what we might call instead of a Wild West phase, a North Korea phase, which is to say a low aggression, high hierarchy phase.
And what we mean by a low aggression state in this case is a low outright behavioral aggression phase, but it's high in the threat of aggression.
And that's very, that's very important to understand is that, you know, hierarchies and egalitarian configurations in our species and so so so many others isn't always or even usually maintained by actual outright aggressive behavior, but by threat displays by the, you know, by implied violence.
And then likewise a society can have an egalitarian phase or can be egalitarian and the fluidity of the notion of egalitarianism in terms of the distribution of the capacity for coercion and aggression in a society is intrinsically related to fluidity.
It is the fluidity of coalitions that exercise violence and aggression that defines and characterizes egalitarianism.
So there's a rich anthropological literature on this kind of thing where egalitarian societies are not societies in which there is no impetus to domination in which individuals simply never conceive of using aggression and coercion to dominate others.
It's a society where when that happens, that person's attempts are subject to a counterpower that subdues that attempt at domination.
And that counterpower, you know, basically the same means that are available to us in contemporary mass societies are the ones that are used in traditional societies, egalitarian societies, small scale societies,
whether hunter-gatherer or dispersed, you know, cultivators or whatever.
Right. So they have at their disposal the tools of social sanction, commentary, humor, scathing condemnations and all that.
And then they have violence just like us.
They can, you know, either use culture or they can use coercion.
And so, you know, what you see in a society like that is that they have stories very frequently or anthropologists directly observe cases in which somebody attempts to dominate and is either ridiculed, scorned, mocked, whatever to a point where they kind of retreat from their attempt at domination,
or if that fails, they're killed.
And the crucial thing to understand about societies of this nature is that the coalition that forms to subdue that attempt at domination would itself become an instrument of domination if it became permanently institutionalized.
If that configuration of individuals became, you know, the ostensible counter force to hierarchy and domination in that society, they would eventually just become the police.
What is central is that they don't.
What they don't is that if an individual or a subset of individuals from that particular coalition or if the entire coalition that formed to depose somebody's attempt at domination in turn attempts to dominate others in their society,
then other people will rise up to depose their attempt at domination and individuals from that initial coalition will defect from it.
You know, so if you are working with a militia or whatever you want to call it, some force, a team, some social configuration that was formed in order to depose an aspiring tyrant and then you see it turning into the police,
you can always just talk to a subset of the people involved and form a different coalition and present a counter force to that attempt at domination.
And so an egalitarian society is characterized by a ceaseless fluidity of association such that the capacity for coercion is always shifting into new counter forces that prevent any given coalition from gaining
from instituting what is sometimes called the iron law of oligarchy, which is just, you know, that if some entity is formed to prevent domination from occurring, but they have exclusive access to the means of coercion,
then they will themselves dominate.
We are from the Crane Fist School. Let me try your snake fist then.
In the instances of egalitarian societies that we were just discussing, it's not just that people have stories. It's not, you know, just that there's like accounts that are sort of informal and chatty about instances in which aspiring tyrants were deposed or assassinated or whatever.
There's often sort of formalized mythologies. And so, you know, these function to communicate social norms, to communicate a given social groupings disposition towards despotism and hierarchy, and that is to say that they function as a kind of aggressive threat display.
So just like some animals bear their teeth or just like the police wander around with guns, you know, in acts of aggressive threat display, stories about what happens to people who decide they're in charge function as aggressive threat displays.
This is a ubiquitous feature of aggression and coercion in society, human societies or in species, regardless of how egalitarian or hierarchical they are.
So it's very, very common for species to have some kind of ritualized threat display language. And this involves the principles and dynamics of ritualized communicative behavior in general.
I actually read this very quote from Conrad Lawrence's paper on ritualization in one of the metamorphosis episodes, but it's worth repeating one more time.
He says of communicative ritualized symbolic behavior, all those elements which even in the unritualized primary movement produce visual or auditory stimulation are strongly exaggerated.
Although serving the original mechanical function are greatly reduced or disappear altogether. So I think a very readily comprehensible case of this is the bearing of teeth, which is an intuitively recognizable aggressive display to pretty much all of us are other primate relatives do it all the time as do many other species like wolves and whatnot.
And you know the ritualized bearing of teeth, of course, is derivative of the actual aggressive behavior of biting, but as he says the act of the actual mechanical function the actual act of biting is no longer present.
And the bearing of teeth, the visual element like hey look at my teeth is greatly exaggerated. And so, you know, all species pretty much that engage in any kind of significant aggression have a set of communicative behaviors that indicate a willingness and a capacity willingness to engage in aggression and a capacity to do so.
So that individuals can evaluate one another's respective capacities for force and decide whether it's really worth it and if it's not they can submit without getting hurt and likewise the individual who's likely to come out on top in a fight doesn't have to get seriously injured in the process of proving that they're the ones who would win the fight.
And then even when outright behavioral aggression does occur, many, many species fight in a somewhat ritualized way that constrains their mass, maximum aggressive abilities, right? So this is so ubiquitous that Conrad Lorenz, who really did spend a whole lot of time directly observing animals, falsely thought well, well into his career,
that humans were the only species that engaged in lethal aggression with other members of our own species. That's emphatically not true. chimpanzees kill one another in territorial disputes all the time. Wolves do it all the time.
It's not super common. The lions kill each other sometimes so on and so forth. Number of other species kill like infants in order to basically engender reproductive opportunities like horses do that, for instance.
But when you see two adult animals of the same species fight, it is very frequently the case that they fight in some kind of according to some degree of ritualized restraint, you see that in humans all the time.
Of course, too, you see that, you know, political street fights in the United States where everybody really does have guns, very often conducted with like fists and clubs and shields and whatever we, you know, make a specialized set of armor and weapons to go out and fight the police with,
even though both sides really do have guns, you know, gangs like street gangs until somewhere in the mid 20th century, typically fought with fists and chains and sticks and knives instead of guns.
Once the lethal aggression comes out, it tends to be kind of difficult. It's a little self perpetuating and like difficult to put back in the box, but, you know, it even is possible and there are cases of that occurring, certainly.
And so we can't that so that creates the situation where we can't if we're being field biologists and we're trying to classify any given society in terms of the extent to which the behaviors of social domination are present.
We're ignoring whatever that society's with the power structures self description as we're ignoring the ideology and the abstract language that's used to characterize the society and we're simply classifying a society, you know, we're using this hierarchical index to try to classify societies in terms of a hierarchical to egalitarian spectrum.
We have to take account for the pervasiveness and the degree of asymmetry of distribution of threat displays of implied as well as actual aggression.
And one of the remarkable things, you know, somewhat counterintuitive things that emerges when we we do that is that we actually see that in a lot of cases societies where outright behavioral aggression is more common.
Our societies that are actually less hierarchical, because the societies that are more hierarchical tend to have really severe consequences for reciprocating the aggression of dominant individuals.
If a dominant individual in North Korea attempt attempts to subdue or subordinate somebody and they fight back that person is going to die or go to a prison camp for a long time or whatever.
Right, you know, likewise here in the United States if you if you land a really good blow on the police and they catch you you're going to get locked up for a long time or you're going to get killed or whatever.
Whereas you can go to other can you can go to Europe and land a pretty decent blow on the police and not really go to jail for nearly as long and be like very unlikely that you'd actually get gunned down in the street.
And you know, and so this is true of many other species.
There's a fascinating case study of ringtail and stump tail macaques. These are two species of monkey that have really different dominant styles.
And I thought I would read from this paper by France to fall about their two respective social forms and the intensity and frequency of aggression that instantiates these social forms, because indeed they're sort of like a high frequency of low intensity
aggression in society in one case and that creates a more egalitarian structure and a low frequency of high intensity aggression in another case which creates a more hierarchical society.
So Deval says the social organization of stump tail monkeys is characterized by more tolerant less antagonistic principles than that of Reese's monkeys paradoxically stump tails exhibit a relatively high rate of aggression.
Yet their aggression only rarely escalates to serious biting. The species aggressive behavior can be characterized therefore as high frequency, low intensity, perhaps as a result of the more effective control of aggression.
It is not uncommon for subordinate stump tails to return threats received from dominant individuals.
The aggressive behaviors of Reese's monkeys on the other hand can be characterized as low frequency, high intensity. The species rigidly adheres to its hierarchy and as a rule severely punishes subordinates who attempt to take priority in competitive situations.
Not surprisingly, subordinates rarely dare to counter aggression and more asymmetrical relationships are the result. These differences have been described in terms of egalitarian versus despotic dominant styles in stump tail and Reese's monkeys respectively.
And I can't help but note really quickly at the risk of a somewhat substantial digression because it just really is so interesting, you know, doesn't maybe directly bear on what we're saying.
It does indicate the plasticity of social temperament involved in creating all these dynamics and other species and therefore presumably in ours.
That quote is from a paper in which Franz de Waal and his colleagues had the infants of these two respective species, these two species, stump tails and ring tails, fostered in one another's societies.
And so what he found is that the more aggressively, the more dominant of the two species, the one he characterized as more despotic when fostered among individuals of the species he characterized as more egalitarian, adopted a more egalitarian social structure.
And interestingly, they weren't simply copying the social behaviors and the reconciliation behaviors in particular of the species that they had been fostered by.
They adopted a truly distinct set of behaviors that indicated that what really had been elicited by the novel social environment they were raised in was just a fundamentally different social temperament.
So that's interesting. And to really have a coherent picture of how aggressive threat displays function to, you know, maintain a given social form.
We also really do have to understand that it's not just the asymmetry of their distribution or the frequency of the enactment of aggressive displays, but also their intensity.
You know, we can kind of array aggressive threat displays on a continuum of proximity to actual aggression, right?
So, you know, we can see this, you know, bears do this, for instance, like bears have these three different sort of aggressive threat displays that indicate three different levels of proximity to them actually attacking you.
I can't remember what the first or the last one are, but I remember the intermediate one because I've experienced it when a bear came up to my tent once in Vermont, which is a succession of three short grunts.
And, you know, when you do that, you know that a bear is getting closer to actual aggression than they would be if you heard the less intense threat display, but they're not quite as close as they'd be if you heard the more intensive threat display.
And so, you know, in human context, we can also array different threat displays of, you know, being produced by the dominant hierarchy to everybody else in the society in terms of their intensity.
You know, so if you go somewhere like Iraq or Yemen or the weed country where I spent a lot of my adolescence or North Dakota during the Standing Rock uprising, it's not just that police are patrolling in cars and they're just kind of around and you see them every once in a while
and you know if you're doing something the dominant hierarchy forbids, then, you know, their presence indicates that actual violence is going to be exercised against you.
But now you're in this situation where there's helicopters constantly circling, you know, to invoke a very clear sense that a much greater scale of aggression at a far greater like imminent,
a far greater likelihood of it being exercised is right there staring you in the face.
You know, obviously Iraq and Yemen in cases of military conflict, Standing Rock, it was the FBI and private security contractors.
In the case of weed country where I spent my adolescence, it was the federal government, the DEA with their drug eradication programs.
Just like in Vietnam, they would fly low in the valleys so that you couldn't hear them and then rise up over the ridges real fast.
And it was pretty terrifying.
And you can really feel, I bring this up because we can really sample getting back to this sense in which we kind of inhabit the physiology of subordination at any given time that we live in a dominant hierarchy.
You can really feel the shifts in the intensity of the degree of subordination you're currently experiencing as you traverse different environments like that.
As you go from some minimally policed suburbs to a heavily policed urban area or whatever to a military style policing event like the Standing Rock Uprising.
And you can feel the shift in your internal, in your physiology and therefore in your subjective state, you know, in the reasoning processes that your embodied state generates.
Let me try your snake fist then.
And so having established all this real quick to, you know, kind of circle back to the really chaotic reasoning processes that are invoked in justifications of the state.
Biological parsimony is the most fundamental counter to the many justifications for the state that we encounter among liberals and authoritarians and mainstream social science and everywhere else that we encounter it.
You know, so one of the claims that is most commonly made is that absent to dominance hierarchy, humanity will descend into chaos and everybody will run wild and all that good stuff.
And there just is no other species for which this is true and it is therefore just really not abundantly clear why it should be true for humans.
So, you know, species can like massively vary in their degree of despotism right species can be arrayed along a despotic to egalitarian continuum, and that continuum is not also a chaotic to orderly continuum.
These two dimensions of variation just are not the same thing at all.
So, you know, the question has to be asked like why would that be true of humans alone?
Why would we alone among species require dominance hierarchy in order to not just constantly be at each other's throats quoting again from Wilson's sociobiology.
In general, prosimians, particularly lemurs and old world monkeys have moderate to strong hierarchies.
Anthropoids apes have weakly developed hierarchies and species of no world monkeys vary greatly, some lacking hierarchies altogether and others showing weak to moderate dominance orders.
And the point, of course, that he's making it's not really exactly it's not too quotable, but that this has no relationship with the social complexity, or the degree to which these societies of these different species can be characterized as orderly,
or to phrase it negatively are not characterized by a ceaseless, you know, war of all against all.
It should be noted that sometimes dominance hierarchies do intervene in other conflicts and conflicts between subordinate individuals in a society, and therefore maintain a kind of order.
But egalitarian coalitions and other species also intervene in conflicts and therefore maintain a certain kind of order.
It's just really not abundantly clear why you need somebody in charge who has used their monopoly on violence to gain the vast majority to gain disproportionate access to opportunities and resources in order to do that kind of thing.
The two things once again are not the same. We enduringly conflate them in our dialogue because of the unintegrated thinking that the physiology of subordination elicits.
And, you know, so finally that's kind of there's this radical mismatch between the stated purposes of states in liberal dogma and the reality of dominance hierarchy and every other species in which dominance hierarchy is found.
In terms of these, you know, this rhetoric around a securing rights or ensuring equal access to resource, you know, like bizarrely one of the stated reasons for dominance hierarchy and a lot of state justifying rhetoric is that it will somehow ensure
equal access to resources and opportunities for everybody. And that is literally the opposite purpose that is the antithesis of the reason for dominance hierarchy in every other species in which it is found.
Dominance hierarchies do not exist for any of these reasons in any other species. They exist to secure disproportionate access to resources and opportunities for those who instantiate the hierarchy.
So biological parsimony would really grab us by the fucking throat and scream in our faces. Why the fuck should this be true for humans if not for any other species that we require a minority to exercise a monopoly on aggression and coercion in order to institute these conditions that no other species
requires a dominance hierarchy to institute? And why wouldn't it be true that a dominance hierarchy would exist in humans for the exact same reasons it exists in every other species?
You also, of course, see a lot of state justifying rhetoric that sort of conflates social complexity and the ability to administer complex cooperative divisions of labor with dominance hierarchy, right?
So you'll see serious, prestigious social scientists ask with a straight face how it could be in looking, for instance, at urban societies like the Indus Valley Civilization that don't really have the markers of dominance hierarchy that we associate,
the markers that we reliably associate in archaeology with dominance hierarchy, like centralized palaces and monumental architecture devoted to the glorification and deification of kings and elites and all that stuff, or just like massive stratifications of wealth of any kind.
They'll still insist that there must have been a hierarchy because they'll ask this question with a straight face, well how could people have coordinated the building of these walls or these public baths or these other mass cooperative divisions of labor without a hierarchy?
It's really this bizarre, bizarre question, you know, like, well how could people have collaborated to do something together? Here, surprisingly, suddenly, the conflation of hierarchy and, you know, cooperation takes this weird, or this, the ostensible disassociation of hierarchy and cooperation takes this weird turn, and, you know, suddenly they're not so opposed after all.
But, you know, it's a truly bizarre question, this question of how could a mass endeavor, a mass cooperative division of labor have occurred without there being a tiny proportion of the population that had disproportionate access to resources?
It just doesn't make any sense.
You know, so the answer of how people could have coordinated their efforts is they could have had a meeting, right? The same thing that ultimately would have to happen in a hierarchy or otherwise.
But it is to, you know, just speak quickly about the sort of like ostensible biological foundations of this line of reasoning. It is true that some species that are heavily reliant on cooperative divisions of labor are particularly hierarchical
species, hyper-social, eusocial insects are a particularly good example. But what seems to be true in these cases is that it's not that the hierarchy is necessary for the cooperative endeavor to occur.
What's true is that reliance on mass cooperative divisions of labor significantly constrains escape potential, and that lack of escape potential allows for hierarchical dynamics to become a lot more easy to pull off.
It becomes a lot more easy to dominate somebody if one of their options, one of their truly fundamental options of just walking away from the interaction is no longer present.
And this has been something where the extent anthropological literature on egalitarian societies I think really is quite sufficient and robust and does a pretty good job of allowing us to understand
these distinctions, especially when integrated with the literature on, you know, species relying on significant cooperative divisions of labor, which is that if you are reliant on a specific person for the fundamentals of your survival and well-being,
it is very likely that hierarchical dynamics will eventually ensue. But if you're reliant on cooperation for your survival and well-being, but there is a fluidity of association where in the famous words of James Woodburn and his paper, his 1982 paper,
Egalitarian societies, when you are not reliant on specific other persons, you can be reliant on other persons, but not a specific person, then you can achieve cooperation in these fluid coalitions that allow for egalitarianism to persist.
And that sense of, you know, of being reliant on cooperation, but having a fluidity of association is the core insight that allows for the capacity for aggression and coercion to be maintained in a fluid fashion that enables egalitarianism.
And so we can talk a little bit about how one would actually attempt to instantiate this in contemporary mass societies. You know, it's fairly straightforward in the sense that one is attempting to transcend some of the specialization that life in complex hierarchical societies has engendered,
where there's kind of two classes of people in the current social milieu who have the capacity for violence. They're both temperamentally extreme individuals. So it's basically that there's a small minority of the population that is less plastic in their aggressive propensities.
They're less likely to not develop aggressive behaviors, even in a society where aggression isn't like a central aspect of their development.
And the only real distinction between them is that some of them actually self-select into specialized social roles where the exercise of violence is required of them or violence is their job.
So this is the police into some slightly lesser extent the military. And then it's just all the people who are temperamentally particularly prone to aggression who don't have any professional social role specialization where they're getting paid for it, but they nonetheless go out shooting all the time and all that.
So the mandate becomes to kind of transcend what I call fracture, the way that hyper-specialized like narrow social roles have elicited a very narrow range of our biological potential, such that most of us who are not temperamentally particularly prone to aggression
simply do not develop the capacity for it at all. It's just not an option. And because reasoning is embodied, so many of the people for whom aggression is simply not an option,
experience that as a basis for their kind of like weird philosophies about how violence shouldn't ever be used by anybody or their inability to see that violence is central to the state or whatever, right?
People kind of like engage in this reasoning, this post hoc justification for their lack of capacity to engage in aggressive behavior.
And then others of us can see that aggression and domination does in fact determine social conditions, but we still don't really feel like it's very accessible or whatever, right?
So I really think that this is ultimately the story of how dominance hierarchies came to characterize the vast majority of the human experience as social and technological complexity intensified.
I think that, you know, in a time and a place where, say, everybody hunts and everybody uses weapons or whatever, there might be variation in, you know, temperamental variation in individual propensities for aggression,
but everybody remains reasonably competent at it sufficiently to form coalitions to depose any would-be despots.
And it's only when a bunch of us are spending the vast majority of our time and energy toiling in the fields or whatever, you know, working in specialized workshops, you know, where weavers and scribes and potters and whatever else,
where a minority of the popular, a minority temperamentally distinct subset of the population becomes the only people who are capable of aggression, and that is when dominance hierarchy takes over.
So that's not really a theory of state formation that necessarily contradicts a number of other theories, you know, circumscription theory and some other things like that, if you're familiar, are pretty congruent with that,
but I think it's an essential aspect of how dominance hierarchy came to characterize the human experience. I think we absolutely have to understand social role specialization and its developmental consequences,
and therefore an attempt to, you know, to reinstate egalitarianism, an attempt to escape the confines of hierarchy is an attempt to overcome the fracture to which we are subject.
It is an attempt to overcome the very narrowly specialized ranges of biological potential which we have developed in these hyper complex societies we inhabit.
And, you know, to do that one kind of starts anywhere, one starts by gaining some capacity for aggression, one learns to fight, one buys a gun and learns to shoot, and one starts to team up with other people and to form some kind of force capable of exercising violence.
And then to this question of, you know, like how the fluidity is maintained, how one avoids not only deposing the police in order to become the police, but, you know, hopefully avoids just all the like tragic and unnecessary bloodshed that that probably implies, right?
So the purpose of mastering a martial art is not having to use it, as Miyomaru Musashi said.
So let's take, let's imagine three individuals and we'll just call them A, B, and C, right?
And so this could be what A, B, and C are doing now.
I'm going to, I'm going to say we're pretending like this is like a little bit of a post-revolutionary society because I like thinking about the particular social roles and relationships that they inhabit and that distinct configuration.
But please do note that nothing about the scenario I'm describing requires any fundamental social shift to occur, that what I'm talking about is something that people concretely could do right here and now.
And there's no real threshold before which this kind of behavior is completely useless, right?
That any attempt in this, any movement in this direction is both concretely useful and I think pretty fun.
I think it's a healthy form of development, right?
You know, for so many of us, the specific traumas that we've experienced when we integrate or overcome those traumas, that is a process that is often accompanied by or to some extent characterized by
a newfound ability to access a healthy aggression that had previously been suppressed.
And then because we are all inhabiting the collective trauma of subordination, any kind of any experience of accessing the, you know, the ability to say,
if somebody puts their hands on me without my permission, they don't get the hand back, feels good.
It feels really profoundly liberatory.
So any steps we take in this direction I think are useful.
I'm reminded of this Earth Liberation Front arson manual from the 90s in which the author who committed suicide upon his incarceration for participation in Earth Liberation Front arsons,
you know, he wrote this manual about constructing electronic timers and he says at the end,
build one of these even if you don't plan on using it because the way you see the world will change.
And I think that's really true of any of these capacities we develop.
I'm, you know, I'm standing a few feet away from a pile of radios and climbing harnesses and balaclavas and tactical vests and stuff like that.
And, you know, possessing these things really does change how I experience the world.
But yeah, so, so here's, here's the hypothetical configuration of these various this, you know, this illustration of the notion that multiple social formations capable of exercising violence should and like can and should proliferate in a society
such that no one of them can claim despotic power.
We have individuals A, B and C.
And let's say that there are kind of three basic foundations for the for the cohesion of a unit, a social formation capable of violence, we'll call them units.
Instead of, we could say militia, but I'm going to say unit and I mean it very specifically in that way.
And throughout the rest of this episode, a group of people capable of using violence together.
So, you know, there's kind of like maybe three basic foundations for the formation of a unit.
There is, of course, geography, right?
Any question of violence and the prevention of monstrous behavior is going to be somewhat geographical.
And so people who just happen to live around each other, whatever else they have in common, it does make a lot of sense for geography to be one foundation for units upon which units form.
And then we can also say like any kind of shared material or economic reality, because of course that's just a fundamental basis for affiliation and affinity throughout human history.
So, you know, these might be people who you share similar work with or, you know, anything like that, you know, who you rely on the same agricultural like collectively farmed agricultural plots or whatever for your subsistence with.
And then, of course, you know, just anything else that draws people together, their scientific affinities, their religious affinities, their shared culture, whatever.
Okay, so let's say that a lives on, I don't know, let's say 13th and whole gate in Portland, just for instance.
And let's say that a is a biologist, just for instance, but also a laborer, you know, a is spent a lot of time doing like construction labor and stuff like that.
And let's say that culturally, just for instance, a really loves weird like ritual black metal and performance art and stuff like that.
Okay. And so each of these realities puts a in contact with distinct a distinct set of people a is, you know, each individual in our schema is the epicenter of their own network of affinities and associations, each individual at least
potentially belongs to a distinct configuration of parallel units.
Right. Okay. And so, you know, the first of these characteristics of a that I've described that he lives on 13th and in whole gate is obviously Geo geographical.
And then you know, his affinity for like black metal and ritual performance and whatnot is obviously cultural and then his status as a laborer is obviously like the material foundation.
And I would say that the fact that a is a biologist is this, this foundation that kind of transcends the line between a material and a cultural foundation.
Because there could certainly be some people who a works with who a kind of like just shares material realities with you know they all like share the same lab equipment or a collaborators on some enterprise.
But you know don't necessarily like see the world in the same way or like write papers together or have much sort of like affinity of worldview, but then there are also going to be people that a knows who like kind of inhabit the same niches of
biology or, you know, are on the same side of various theoretical divides, who he might be more likely to correspond with or be friends with or just have a sort of different level of affinity with.
But in any case what we want to do is illustrate a's relationship with B and C. So a knows B and C, although B and C do not know each other.
And A and B know each other through shared geography. They're not really the same kind of people at all. They don't really have much in common.
B is just some person. And let's say B is a food producer B B farms right and B is also a construction worker.
And let's say also because you know B B's not like a real weirdo or anything. But let's say that B belongs to a Portland area Game of Thrones fan base that talks on the internet a lot and even sometimes meets up and gets drunk in costumes or whatever.
And so A and B find themselves in exactly one overlapping unit. And that's the geographical one, even though B also belongs to a unit that formed out of his, you know, his work in construction, a unit of construction workers and B is part of a Game of Thrones fan base unit.
Okay. And then let's say that C, who knows A but not B doesn't really have a geographical foundation for participation in a unit because C is like a super weirdo. She's like a nomad.
She's never really in any one place for too long. And she knows a through their shared participation in some of these like weirdo fringe cultural activities.
You know, C likes ritual black metal to and she's collaborated with a on some projects. And so that's, you know, the conceivable basis for their shared participation in another unit that has, you know, that might be like really broadly distributed throughout the west coast or the Pacific Northwest or whatever.
But these are people who really do share some fundamentals of worldview and sort of like basic temperament and orientation. These are all people who like the forest and are real critical of technology and, you know, kind of have this sort of shared spirituality and whatnot.
And then we can see how, you know, all these people and maybe maybe let's just toss in there so that C isn't just part of one formation. There's also like, you know, this sort of like anti technological anti authoritarian orientation that both a and C share, you know, puts them in touch with some other
networks where that aren't necessarily defined by weirdo fringe cultural activity, but by their political outlook, you know, they, they might both participate or see herself alone might participate in some kind of, you know, like eco anarchist unit or whatever.
Okay, so what is important to understand is that all of these units don't have to be like persistent obligations that people go and train with in any kind of like ceaseless sense.
They're really just networks of communication and affinity. They're people who know each other and have some basis to be in contact and to form, you know, to essentially like constitute themselves as a unit as needed.
All that's necessary is that all of these individuals do some level of training, you know, like I said, have some developmental experience of the capacity of exercising the capacity for aggression and coercion.
You know, they all go shooting with somebody and have experience of moving as a unit with somebody clearing rooms and talking on radios and all the other stuff that configurations of people who are engaged in violent conflict do together.
They're like just like soldiers don't have to necessarily, you know, only fight with people that they have years of experience operating with as a unit. The important thing here is that everybody gains some fundamental competence to exercise violence and coercion, and that everybody
has a great diversity of different networks that they can tap into to constitute different units with that can function as counterforces to any given unit that appears to be gaining the capacity for domination that is starting to exercise a despotism.
Let me try your snake fist then.
And, you know, once again, invoking the notion that threat displays are how social conditions are so frequently maintained as opposed to outright acts of aggression.
It should be enough in a lot of cases for people to exhibit this kind of vision fusion dynamic in their alliances with different units to prevent like outright shooting conflicts and stuff like that from occurring.
You know, if, for instance, A and B's geographically defined unit has been responding to, I don't know, you know, some cereal, whatever, some like, you know, crew of people going around doing home invasion robberies or trying to, and they've been like working together a lot so that they're kind of becoming this tight and prominent force.
And then people start to get a little anxious and start thinking this actually starting to feel a little bit like the police in a way. It's starting to feel like this capacity for violence that they've been developing is giving them sort of really disproportionate power in this area.
Then A or B could engage other people that they know in other contexts, right? A could call up C and say, let's get all the people we know from this other context together, right? Like let's get all the people who are at the summer solstice performance together.
Or, you know, B can call all of his Game of Thrones friends or all of his construct construction friends.
And they can, whatever, patrol the neighborhood, or, you know, just start spending some time engaging in some level of threat display sufficient to counter the power of this geographically defined unit that was starting to like, maybe sort of inhabit the margins of despotism, right?
And again, the threat display is typically enough to counter the actual need for aggression.
Something that I want to note about, if this sounds chaotic or whatever, if this sounds like it has the potential to like spiral into all form, all manner of, you know, really, really wild oscillations of power with a lot, you know, with all eruptions, you know, punctuated by.
Frequent episodes of intense violence. It's actually really worth noting that this is just seriously the logic of states and their displays of the capacity for aggression and counter aggression throughout a lot of history.
So if you read a book, for instance, like William Shire's The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich, what you see is that the history of coalitions of European nations throughout the entire modern age is really like much, much, much less.
So ideological or premised on any other foundation, then just not letting any given coalition of states become too powerful.
So you see a lot of alliance and counter alliance, a fission infusion, formations of relationships and then defections from those relationships that are all just this elaborate dance to not let any coalition gain despotic power.
Over everybody else in Europe. And so really, you know, one is just posing the question of why, why not just do this at the scale of individuals and therefore not allow any of us to be horribly dominated.
And one of the interesting things, you know, just as like nation states engage in a pretty wide variety of communicative behaviors of aggressive threat displays to prevent themselves from being dominated by and, you know, invaded by powerful coalitions of other nations and whatnot.
We can think of all these kind of interesting sort of like information technologies, or just like ways of signaling some level of organization and cohesion that would function pretty similarly.
So, you know, this could be anything from, you know, so just like nation states tended to advertise their alliances for the purposes of not being invaded.
You know, just even stuff like having a phone tree or whatever right that is somehow publicly discernible that somehow like a parent to other you know the communicating the existence of alliance alliances in a way that is apparent to other alliances goes a very long way towards preventing outright acts of domination and aggression.
There was an app for a while that sort of like had this very interesting architecture like this that was just there for engendering community responses to emergencies.
But anybody could form a group with anybody else. And that was transparent, you know, who one was in alliance with at least in theory in this app that you could look at on your phone was visible to other people.
And so, you know, you could use it to notify people of emergencies and stuff like that, but it would be actually quite easy to imagine a world in which everybody is looking at something like this and seeing all of the different parallel configurations of the capacity for violence that exists in a given configuration of individuals
in a given area, whatever, and seeing how no one of them really does have despotic power. But likewise, you know, we also just there's a pretty substantial body of anthropology that's devoted to examining how a whole lot of different kinds of like rituals and collective, you know, endeavors
and cooperative efforts at monumental architecture, things like that all kind of function in the same way that if you know if it's implicit if it can be taken for granted in a society that people with a significant degree of social cohesion have some capacity to fight together to defend themselves from an attempt at domination
then doing almost anything together having a fucking cookout or whatever goes a very long way holding a concert, you know, picking up trash on the street together, whatever, like building something together goes a very, very long way to communicating to others that if you come out one of us you're coming at all of us which goes a very long way
towards preventing people from coming at each other. And the last thing that I wanted to mention about some of these like sort of more specialized formations, these these more specialized units, is that, you know, we can conceive of ways in which maybe like geographic and material
populations would be sufficient to dispel domination in a pretty significant number of cases. But I think it is actually quite interesting and important to imagine some instances in which sort of like temperamentally unique, you know, where like psychologically
distinct subsets of the population really probably should have the capacity to exercise collective force. I mean that is after all what the police and at least the like more specialized branches of the military, the military is full of people who just like want
to go to college or whatever but you know the special forces and stuff like that aren't. And you know what those are is very psychologically distinct subsets of the population, exercising the capacity for violence to pretty much everyone else's detriment.
Except for the CEOs of corporations and stuff like that. And you know, it's, it's at least conceivable that there would be some cases I mean I'm thinking for instance of what like geographically defined units, if that and materially defined units if that was all that existed
like decisions they might make about I don't know, clear cutting forests or something like that. If there wasn't, you know, some people with sort of like distinct ways of looking at the world who formed units together to address certain kinds of situations.
And what's fun about all this, like I said, is that you can kind of just do some version of this at any point in time. And there's no consequences for only getting so far right like the worst thing that's going to happen is that you're going to get well I mean there's terrible possibilities implicit in anything
that you do but the worst thing that's likely to happen is that you know you'll go out shooting and have a good time but not get particularly good at it, or you'll study a little bit of Krav Maga.
I don't make you a merciless killing machine but you'll like get a little cardiovascular exercise, or you'll like form a sort of very tentative vague and not particularly effective unit capable of exercising violence together but at least you'll be hanging out with your friends and you'll be in the forest running around
playing capture the flag or sneaking around, you know, some railroad tracks or whatever it is you're going to do, and probably having a pretty good time.
I don't want to to concretely offer advice on like exactly how one should attempt to progress through the developmental process of gaining the personal capacity for aggression that so many of us have lost in the kinds of societies we inhabit, or for organizing
units into you know specialized into like training for specialized capacities. I would say that I want to avoid that mostly just because I really don't feel like enough of an expert to offer the one true path but I do feel like I've had enough experiences with this throughout my life
and currently to say that there is no one right way and that there's a lot of different things that one can do that are fun and you know broadly speaking I would advise learning a little bit of hand to hand fighting right you know we used to be in a state of
affairs where people really did say my crane fist style will defeat your intoxicated monkey or your fentanyl adult turtle or whatever and people would you know like have fights employing these different martial art styles to like see who's was best
in that process which was probably vastly confounded by different strength and eight potentials and levels of training on the part of the individuals fighting but you know we've kind of gone through that whole process and a fairly like unified cohesive
scientific fighting paradigm has emerged we see it in competitive fighting which has a lot of constraints in the form of MMA but you know martial arts like Krav Maga really are just sort of a scientific synthesis of what works and what doesn't what you absolutely
need to know in order to fight somebody you know what you will be defeated by if you don't know how to deal with all that kind of stuff right the whole like you know if somebody knows jujitsu and you don't have any of it it's pretty easy in a lot of cases to take somebody to the ground
even if they don't want to go to the ground and so if you don't know any of that grappling floor stuff then you're likely going to lose a fight you know you have to have as Bruce Lee discovered a straight jab you can't have all your all your
hand strikes be these like floored sweeping motions or whatever you know it's like we pretty much figured all that stuff out and so learning a little bit of some martial art like that which you can do from a book or from YouTube videos or whatever is really important doing a little bit of running or some
other kind of cardiovascular exercise because just being able to move around is such a fundamental determinant of who comes out on top in a lot of aggressive encounters so important and then you know of course gaining access to and some
degree of proficiency with a firearm or two is of course pretty fundamental you know maybe starting with a I'm kind of doing what I said I wouldn't do but maybe starting with like a nine millimeter handgun or something like that and then
possibly some kind of assault rifle like an AR-15 or a Kalizhnikov you know and learning how to shoot and once again there's a huge continuum of skill but you really don't have to be a crazy expert at it to
prevent present enough of a plausible counter threat that it's not really worth engaging in an aggressive contest of using firearms with you you know if you can like sort of shoot back your you're not an easy target anymore
and then I think it's really really fun to train with people and try some of this stuff out in groups and that it can be like really gratifying to
go to the forest and feel out what it feels like to move with a as a unit you know maybe consult some field manuals for stuff like that find out what it feels like to you know you can very cheaply buy radios with headsets
and find out what it feels like to communicate with people who you're not in direct contact with and move through a landscape through you know towards some kind of shared target or objective or whatever
and you know of course the elaborations are endless it's also fun to I don't know play weird games have captured the flag on what are tech what is technically private property with groups of your friends and stuff like that you know I mean it's it's fun it's
interesting it's life affirming and joyful to have a bunch of these experiences that are necessary to gain the capacity to not be dominated by others