Title: Revolutionary Biology pt 1 Nature vs Nurture vs Synthesis
Episode #: 59
Episode ID: 12388082
Source: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/12388082-revolutionary-biology-pt-1-nature-vs-nurture-vs-synthesis.mp3
------------------------------------------------------------

=== EPISODE METADATA ===
Generated: 2026-01-12 01:02:06
Episode ID: 14224417
MP3 File: 14224417-jesus-of-nazareth-and-the-biology-of-defeat.mp3
Title: Jesus of Nazareth and the Biology of Defeat
Podcast/Artist: World Tree Center for Transformative Politics and Global Survival
Album/Series: Fight Like An Animal
Source URL: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/14224417-jesus-of-nazareth-and-the-biology-of-defeat.mp3
========================
Greetings, friends. I'm Arnold Schroeder, and this is Fight Like an Animal, a podcast of
the World Tree Center for Evolutionary Politics and Global Survival. Find episode bibliographies
and other texts at AgainstTheInternet.com, and if you'd like to know more about the
World Tree Center, please check out the WorldTreeCenter.com.
My contact information is available on the podcast website, and I encourage correspondence of
all varieties. And if you'd like to support this work materially, please check out patreon.com
slash biological singularity.
Well, we're a little late. This was supposed to be a Christmas episode in the sense that
it was going to be released on Christmas, and that didn't happen. But I figure I have
until New Year, you know, as long as the Christmas lights are still up, it's appropriate.
You really don't have to listen, of course, in that window of time. What we're the themes
we're considering here are durably relevant year round. And that is, we're trying to trace
one particular feedback loop between culture and biology. So the overarching revolutionary
biology thesis, I find myself increasingly referring to a body of thought as revolutionary
biology. As I continue to work on my now very, very overdue first book draft, the notion
that, you know, I increasingly find that the body of ideas presented there, some of which
strongly overlap with ideas presented here on this podcast, you know, I refer to it
as like an official doctrine or whatever. So the official revolutionary biology thesis
is that the reason that we live in the society that we live in, the reason that there's such
an intensifying set of dynamics that seem increasingly inexorable, increasingly difficult
to exit the from is because of these various feedbacks between social complexity and biology,
where we increasingly inhabit social roles and live out developmental trajectories
that elicit very narrow ranges of our overall evolved behavioral and perceptual potentials.
The broadest way to characterize the tragic distinction between people that emerges in
this scenario is that those who have power don't understand the world and those who understand
the world have no ability to exercise power. And so these, you know, these feedback loops
can be absolute, they're absolutely everywhere, right? You know, literacy changes our brain
structure. And as books like the alphabet in the brain argue, makes us process, you know,
is like one of the one of the cultural material phenomena that may engender the sort of runaway
dynamics of left brain hemisphere dominance that Ian McGill Christ uses to characterize
this kind of society that we live in that I think is pretty convincing. There's
some decent evidence that that literacy not just changes how we process information in terms of
in terms of text, in terms of language, but actually fundamentally how we process information,
making us see things in more decontextualized, sequentially oriented reductive terms or whatever,
right? So, you know, this is absolutely everywhere. It's in the fact that we live in this,
this insane profusion of 90 degree angles, and it makes us
subject to certain kinds of optical illusions, you know, we go to graduate school and it
emphasizes decontextual, you know, alienated labor and hierarchies, where we are aren't aware of the
holistic nature of the scenarios we participate in. And so we don't have a sense of power agency
in shaping how these systems should be built, all of these different things. And in this episode,
we are focusing on one very powerful feedback loop between our biology and the culture we live
in, which is the story of Jesus of Nazareth, and what it is supposed to tell us about who we are
and our place in the world and the kind of society that we inhabit. And in particular, we'll see,
I mean, obviously, the story of Jesus has been told from many, many different perspectives.
We're going to focus on, of course, the historical Jesus and his political objectives. We're going to
focus on how he devoted his life to achieving something politically, how he failed in that and
was executed by the state force addition, and how in so many accounts, including not just in
religious accounts that, you know, take the content of the Bible literally or whatever,
but also in so many scholarly accounts that are supposed to just be like looking into like,
okay, let's wade past all the surface of these texts and find out what's really going on.
Jesus is utterly depoliticized. You can read scholars who I think are otherwise
quite illuminating like Elaine Pagels, who's written many popular books about, you know,
early Christianity, the authorship of the New Testament, the Gnostic Gospels, things like that.
And she'll say explicitly, she doesn't think Jesus was a revolutionary. This is a terrible
misconception that runs utterly contrary to the evidence that we have. And it kind of is the
point is the thesis that I'm going to present here that our ability to look at somebody being
tortured and executed by the state, suffering this terrible defeat, and not just say, oh,
that's not losing, that's winning, that's, you know, that's transcendental victory. You know,
dying is the new winning, like losing and suffering and being tormented and executed
is actually the only the only like good outcome that one can achieve in life because actually
this world is awful. You know, like we're going to look at how deeply traumatized a story that
really is and what it says about us that we all are supposed to participate in this myth, but
also just the very fact that we don't even see the politics that crucifixion was a very common
form of execution reserved for people. The Roman Empire was trying to make a political point
about reserved for people who had committed the crime of sedition and other very serious crimes
and that he was killed with the acronym for the king of the Jews, you know, on some plaque above
his head or whatever with a crown of thorns placed on his head. And we are supposed to not see
this the very fact that we see this in any terms, other than political ones, no matter
what those terms are kind of is the point. And it reflects a broader process of our disengaging
from thinking about power and being aware of our own agency. And it is, you know, a central
cultural feature that has been involved in eliciting this very narrow range of our behavioral
and perceptual potentials, wherein we simply don't feel like we have any capacity to contend
for power. And well, I doubt that I have many listeners who are Christians. I also I doubt
that I literally have zero. I mean, I've certainly known many people in the climate movement,
for instance, who were, you know, like Unitarians and stuff like that. And, you know, like, I do
want to say that while I am certainly disputing, you know, the the canonical understanding of
the life of Jesus or whatever in this episode, that I'm well aware that people experience
a connection to something that feels real and deeply significant in a huge variety of context,
right, walking around in the forest or in some cases in a church or whatever. And that I think
there's a way to experience that and to recognize it as valid while also hearing what I'm saying,
which in a sense is really, you know, ultimately, I would say that it doesn't disrespect
Jesus of Nazareth to talk about what he really did with his life. It actually disrespects him to
completely negate what he lived and died for. And it isn't an act of respect to turn your Messiah
into somebody who willfully died, who, you know, surrendered to execution by the state to redeem
all of humanity or whatever because your Messiah was angry. So real quickly, we do a lot of generalizing
about religion sometimes. We talk about them like they're all interchangeable, you know,
oh, people have always looked to the sky and wondered what it all meant and sought answers,
whatever. But I think there are some very meaningful differences. One way to illustrate
these differences is to note how in European cultures that were subsumed by Christianity
and Christianity alike, there seems to be this really deep fascination with men suffering on
trees for some great, you know, in service of some grand cosmological design. But when
Christianity came, there was an awful lot of the cutting down of sacred groves and sacred trees
all over, you know, throughout the Baltic states, throughout Scandinavia, and a number of cases.
And for instance, there's this archaeological site in northern Sweden, where they were renovating
the floor of, they had to remove the floor of the church in the course of renovating this
medieval church. And they found that directly beneath the altar of the church was the very
well preserved stump of a birch tree that had been cut down to build the church on top of it and
surrounding the stump of this birch tree from the 10th century were all these bone fragments.
This tree had been a place of sacrifice, right? You know, there's just tons and tons of accounts
of religions involving the veneration of trees. But then where we have where we have records of the
actual explicit mythological contents that were associated with these ritual practices,
for instance, in Scandinavia, we have much better records of the mythologies that preceded
Christianity than we do from a lot of the rest of Europe. There's also, you know,
a guy hanging on a tree, a deity on a tree suffering, not exactly dying maybe, but maybe,
also wounded by a spear in his side even. Certainly going through some process of
tormented self-transgression of some variety or another. But there's this really profound
difference in that it's very, it's truly self-willed. It's not somebody putting their hands on this
deity and hurting him and him having no capacity to resist or affect a different outcome. It's him
going and hanging on a tree of his own accord. And in the shamanic societies, the, you know,
like reindeer herding cultures and whatnot that were adjacent to or approximate to
Scandinavian societies in the Viking Age, there was a practice where a shaman would go
into the canopy of a tree for nine nights and days seeking visions. And so there's probably a fair
amount of overlap between these two, that story and that practice. But here's to read very briefly
from what I really do think is one of the cooler, more enigmatic, spare, compelling, mysterious
pieces of religious verse that has come to us from anywhere in any language. And I really do
apologize, but I studied, I studied this language in a textual sense for a while,
like I did some translations of Old Norse, which definitely does not mean that I ever
learned how to pronounce it. But I just, I have to, you're just gonna have to bear with
me for a second while I read this first in the original language and then in English translation.
I'm sorry.
And translating again, sorry.
So I think that as far as conveying the fundamental reality that development is painful, right,
that in order to achieve new forms of selfhood, to attain new capacities,
we have to undergo these difficult processes of divesting ourselves of our old selves or whatever.
And there's almost no cooler way I know of that that's ever been conveyed than a deity
sacrificing himself to himself on the windy world tree. That's, that's pretty rad. But
the point for our purposes is again, that there's, that this is clearly an exercise
of his own agency, that this is an act of deliberate self-transgression in pursuit of a
more fundamentally integrated or realized or whatever state of being. And this is how
we're told that we should think about the death of Jesus, that it was a self-willed act
that he submitted to some kind of horrifying torment in order to redeem all of humanity forever.
But we can only think about it that way if we ignore the very clear realities that on some level,
of course, we're processing and comprehending, even if we're pretending like we don't,
that, you know, some people put some hands on the man and, you know, mocked and tormented him
against his will and then tortured and killed him and that he didn't gain anything and neither
did his political, his political movement in the process that it was just an utter and absolute
defeat, a complete loss. But, you know, there's a way to think about this is that Christianity
replaced this Odinic mythology, the the extant worldview of North society right around the
time that the state per se really came into existence there. And I don't think that's a
coincidence. And I mean that in a very specific sense. So, you know, power in pre-state,
pre-Christian Scandinavia was, there's certainly a ton of coercion that was exercised
all over that society, but the capacity for it was certainly more equally distributed, right? There
were many diffuse concentrations of much smaller scale power. The practical implications, the
point that I want to make is that for somebody in that society, now again, this is a terribly
stratified society. I don't, I really don't want to idealize it in ways that I'm not trying
to idealize it anyway, but you know, I mean, there were some significant proportion of the
population were slaves, right? There are people for whom this wouldn't be true. But there was a
significant proportion of that population for whom it was possible to think about if somebody
presented a force or the threat of force or coercion or the threat of coercion, it was
totally meaningfully plausible to think about, it would always involve forming alliances with
other people, but you could consider navigating some set of reciprocal relationships such that you
could deter that force from being exercised against you. You could present counter force
against the force that anybody tried to exert on you. And I really think that is actually this
fundamental profound difference, right? The way the embodied experience of inhabiting that society
involves this particular kind of agency that we have all kind of learned to just pretend
like we don't have and to pretend like it, that we've divested ourselves of it because
we've all had this hyper-rational conversation about how violence is bad, actually. And so that's
just not how we do things anymore. Now, that's just not the force that determines the nature
of human relationships or the structure of society or anything. While, of course, we live
in a society where the distribution of power and correspondingly of access to resources is entirely
shaped by violence, right? It doesn't mean anything to say that Jeff Bezos owns 30 houses and I don't
own one, except that if you or I go to one of those houses that Jeff Bezos owns, somebody will
come hit us over the head with a big stick and put us in a cage, right? We live in a society
that incarcerates more of its population than any society ever in history. We live in a society
that, if you're an American, possesses the greatest capacity for violence in the history
of the species on this planet. So, you know, what has actually happened is, of course,
not that violence has ceased to be a determinant of human affairs, but that it's actually become
such a profound determinant of human affairs precisely because everybody else has lost everybody
who's not in this one particular structure on this one particular team, not everybody, but
quite a few of us have just lost, like, completely lost access to the part of ourselves
that understands that it is, in fact, an option to fight. And so, the ways that we describe this
rationally, the ways that we talk about it are, I think, post-hoc rationalizations, right? It's
not that we've actually gone through this process of agonizingly rigorous rational deliberation
and come to the conclusion that violence is bad, actually. It's that we're experiencing an embodied
temperamental state in which it just doesn't feel like an option to contend for power in physical
reality. And so, we just kind of come up with stories about how that's not a good idea and
because it's so unbearable to acknowledge the disjunction between how we're behaving
and how those with power are behaving, we just kind of pretend like it's not even happening.
So, that is the reality that I'm trying to get at to describe the role of the Christian mythology
in terms of as one of the drivers, one of the cultural phenomena that exists in a feedback
loop with biology to create these very particular kinds of beings that we have become.
So, the first point to understand and understanding the life of Jesus of Nazareth is that he is an
exemplar of a tradition that is extraordinarily rich and transcends and durably, durably
cross-cultural. To quote, I thought when I began preparing this episode that I was going to do a
more sort of comparative analysis, invoking examples from a number of other cultures of the
messianic tradition. I thought in particular that I would focus on a few of the really
interesting examples in North American indigenous history, right? The prophet's town movement
and then the, which is like Takumsa and his brother. I really should remember this name. I've read two
books about it at this point. Something like Tense to Wonka or something. Very sorry,
that's probably not right. But, you know, this very huge sort of like pan indigenous movement
that occurred when the United States was only in sort of the eastern half of North America.
And then of course the ghost dance movement that succeeded it by like a hundred years or so
that occurred mostly in the Great Plains, but again was a, you know, like a pan
native movement. And but then also probably even more revealingly the just incredibly rich
history of millenarian apocalyptic messianic revolutionary movements that have characterized
the whole history of political contestation in Southeast Asia. And so I'm not going to do that,
but I will quote from the James Scott book, The Art of Not Being Governed in Anarchist's
History of Upland Southeast Asia, about the sort of just general reality of these movements.
In a world with the odds stacked so massively against them, surely the astounding fact about
marginal hill peoples and many of the world's dispossesses is that they should so often
believe and act as though their deliverance were at hand. Though it's so often ends
tragically this radical bias for hope, the conviction that the world is headed their way
is worthy of our careful attention and perhaps even our admiration. It is hard to imagine what
the world would be like if the dispossessed knowing the long odds were all hard headed
realists. Given their elements of divine intervention and of magic, it is all too
easy to exoticize prophetic movements cast in religious garb. This is a temptation that
should be resisted. It should be resisted because virtually all popular struggles for
power that today would qualify as revolutionary were before the last quarter of the 18th century
generally understood in a religious idiom. Popular mass politics was religion and religion
was political. To paraphrase Mark Block, millennial revolt was as natural to the feudal world as
strikes, let us say, are to large-scale capitalism. Before the first two avowedly secular revolutions
in North America and France in 1776 and 1789, virtually all mass political movements expressed
their aspirations in religious terms. Ideas of justice and of rights and indeed what we
might today call class consciousness were religiously phrased. If then we are interested in
popular aspirations and subaltern politics, we will rarely find them dressed in completely
secular clothing. That such aspirations should take an extra mundane form is not trivial,
as we shall see. But when is politics not, at some level, a theological debate about moral
order? And so I want us to, I want us to think about this. I want to focus on something
that he doesn't say explicitly here, but that I think it's as good a segue into discussing this
as I'm going to find in a text, which is this sense that I have that is mostly just based on
personal experience, that in order to try to pull off a revolution, you have to go a little bit
of a very particular kind of crazy, right, that a revolutionary lives in this bizarre,
this bizarre space, utterly wrought by tension between the reality of the world as it is
and people's expectations of reality and how that ends up creating different realities,
right. And so, you know, a revolutionary, somebody who's always navigating the fact that if people
were sufficiently convinced that revolution were possible, then it would be. And so what a
revolutionary often is, is somebody who manages to convince themselves that things really can
change. And this gets into, you know, it's like the kind of crazy that you have to go is the
same kind of crazy if you're like running up a mountain, you at a certain point stop telling
yourself I can run up this mountain and you start feeling like I can run up any mountain,
I can run into the sky, I can run forever, right. You end up kind of feeling like something is
just so profoundly that the world itself is just on your side, you start to invoke
some sense of like a broader than human agency, a cosmological force at work in the world, you
know, the world is going to be turned upside down and all the fortunes are going to be reversed and
the mountains themselves are on our side and will cast our rulers off of them, you know,
the earth will rise up itself and shed our oppressors and cast them into the sea or
whatever, right. And a really important way to understand Christian and Jewish,
you know, Jewish and by and by extension Christian mythology is to understand this
particular form of political consciousness of rhetoric, this way of being kind of crazy,
as having been gradually more and more divorced from the real world outcomes that it was
generated in reference to and, you know, essentially existed to support and that becoming
a way of thinking on its own terms that the sort of like insane cosmological reality
stops being an agent of political outcomes here in the corporeal world and we start
just sort of getting lost in the magic and the transcendental realms of, you know,
a corporeal myth or whatever. And then we can see in the specific, the Christian myth,
in particular, that sort of like increased orientation towards magical worlds and extra
mundane concerns also take on this very specifically just hyper traumatized,
extremely disassociated quality. Scott also says, referring to the hyper abundant prophetic
tradition of the lahoo, maybe how you pronounce it, he says, the frequency of lahoo prophetic
movements allows us to identify something of a career trajectory, even for an activity so decidedly
unroutine as becoming a God man and goes on to describe how the career trajectory starts pretty
invariably with the the prophet, the Messiah, whatever, going out and having some kind of
visionary transformative experience. And then of course, you know, returning to the people and
saying, I've I've seen the future, I've had the vision. And if we behave in this particular way,
then our liberation is at hand, right? So of course, Jesus was, you know, one of the people
who had an experience like that. And there may have been other elements of it. But it does
seem like it one of the particular crystallizing moments, one of the particularly decisive
transformations happened when he was being baptized by another person who we might
describe as a messianic aspirant, or at least we should understand in the context of the very
long tradition of messianic figures who existed in first century Palestine, and a little bit
before, you know, a little bit before and a little bit after the time of Jesus, you know,
who was also executed by the state for sedition. So the first historical reference that we have
to Jesus that comes from outside of the the New Testament Gospels were all written in the
second half of the first century. So this is, you know, some number of decades after Jesus died.
But the first reference that we have to Jesus from some other source for just in history
is from Josephus, who wrote the Antiquities. Josephus was a Jewish historian writing for
a Roman audience at the end of the first century. And the reference to Jesus itself is actually
very passing. Josephus is concerned with talking about Jesus's brother, James, who was the leader
of the movement that Jesus left behind when he was executed, and had a great deal of political
significance. He's describing the James's status in the Jewish community in Jerusalem
at the time he was executed and the political fallout from his execution. And then just in absolute
passing, he says he says something about how they executed James, the brother of Jesus, the one
they call Messiah, just very cursory. And perhaps we could say, even with like a note of
contempt reference to Jesus. And that is because, like I said, this period of history was just
absolutely brimming with Messiahs. It was absolutely brimming. You know, Jesus was
kind of two things, right? He was a wonder worker, and he was a Messiah. And these career
trajectories are not entirely overlapping. There were people who were Messiahs who were
going to deliver Israel from foreign domination who were like, yo, let's go camp out in the wilderness
with our weapons and like roll up on fools, right? And that, you know, had a pretty like,
a pretty like, corporeally grounded, solidly military approach to the to Messiah hood. And
then there were wonder workers who weren't Messiahs, the, you know, the, the particular
region that Jesus was in in the broader sort of Roman world or, you know, Mediterranean world
or whatever. Pretty much the same thing at that point in time was just absolutely filled with,
you know, magicians and wonder workers. The, if you were to see in image the most common
representation of Jesus from the first, second and third centuries, you know, created by
Christians was Jesus with a wand, with a magic wand, raising up Lazarus from the dead or performing
other feats of healing or whatever. But in those representations, they're really relying on a fairly
stereotyped and preexisting vocabulary of imagery that they use to just communicate
about, you know, magic and wonder working in general, because it was very common at the
time. And then there were some people who were the, you know, the Venn diagram intersection of the two
who were wonder workers and, and Messiahs, you know, and so Jesus was one of those, but he was
one of a great many of these. So Josephus really just kind of very passingly makes reference to
him in talking about James. But we can learn a great deal about what Jesus's politics were
like, because James, it was, you know, his closest collaborator and the
indisputed historians are, you know, pretty much in consensus that James was by far the most
significant person in the movement that Jesus left behind. And, you know, probably the best
representative of what Jesus was all about of Jesus's politics. And so there is a book of James
in the New Testament. And it's probably, probably James didn't actually write it, it'd be very
questionable whether he was even literate. But it's thought that it is based on a sermon that he
delivered shortly before his death. And the book of James is pretty, it's got some of the best
quotes that one could hope to dig up in the Bible. If you're looking for some woe to the rich
kind of stuff. So here's a few examples.
Come now, you wealthy ones weep and howl for the miseries that are about to come upon you.
Your riches have rotted and your garments are moth-eaten. Your gold and silver have corroded
and the venom within them shall be a witness against you. It shall eat your flesh as though
it were fire. Right? That's pretty good. The rich man will pass away like a flower in the field
for no sooner does the sun rise with its scorching heat which withers the field
than the flower dies in its beauty parishes. So it shall be with the rich man. Good stuff, yeah.
And so that's a pretty decent window into the fact that Jesus was not a Christian, right? Jesus
was a Jewish nationalist. He was an angry political actor. And this so often in prophetic
liberation movements or, you know, liberation movements of any kind to whatever extent there
was ever a difference, like Scott said back then. This so often a national liberation
ideology so frequently overlapped with profound contempt for the ethnically, the native ruling
class because it is the nature of foreign domination that the dominators very frequently
select some, you know, tiny minority of the local population to collaborate with
at their, you know, for the sake of their own enrichment in the subjugation of the rest of the
population. So these movements, whether in Israel or elsewhere, very often have those two components
I just mentioned, you know, the politics of national liberation from a foreign oppressor
and a contempt for the ruling class who is collaborating with that foreign oppressor.
There's also this third element that is I think really important for understanding
the distinct nature first of all of Judaism and then eventually of Christianity. And some of the
ways that this religion really did end up becoming very distinct from, you know, that we cannot
just talk about this in terms of like, oh, the human religious mind in terms of these
sweeping generalities that conflate all forms of religious experience and expression,
which is that these movements very frequently have this dimension of providing a narrative about
why the misfortune has befallen a people in the first place that involves some supernatural
agent becoming displeased with that people for deviating from tradition or indulging in some
forbidden pleasure or whatever, right? So I'll quote briefly Elaine Pagels in her book,
The Origin of Satan. At certain points in Israel's history, especially in times of crisis,
war, and danger, a vociferous minority spoke out not against the alien tribes and foreign armies
ranged against Israel, but to blame Israel's misfortunes upon members of its own people.
Such critics, sometimes accusing Israel as a whole and sometimes accusing certain rulers,
claimed that Israel's disobedience to God had brought down divine punishment.
The party that called for Israel's allegiance to the Lord alone included such prophets as
Amos, Isaiah, and Jeremiah, indicted especially those Israelites who adopted foreign ways,
particularly the worship of foreign gods. Such prophets, along with their supporters,
thought of Israel as a truly separate people, holy to the Lord. The more radical prophets
denounced those Israelites who tended toward assimilation as if they were as bad as the
nations. Only a remnant, they said, remained faithful to God. Okay, so here's a quote to give
a sense of the cross-cultural durability of this phenomenon, this way of thinking about
reversals of fortune for a culture. Here is a quote from Takomza and the Prophet,
the heroic struggle for America's heartland, where he's talking about a prophet named
Neolin, who was one of the major inspirations for, he was a predecessor of and one of the major
inspirations for the Pan-native Confederation that the Shani brothers Takomza and Tenskotawa
created at Prophetstown, that is so historically famous. But he says, he's talking about how
Neolin encounters a specter, a spirit, whatever. He says, the spectral visitor escorted Neolin to
the gates of eternity, where the great spirit revealed to Neolin the path to righteousness.
From that night forward, Neolin was a prophet, or an imposter, depending on the source.
Clutching a hieroglyphic painted deerskin and weeping ceaselessly,
he roamed his village, exhorting passers-by to hear and see the great spirit's teachings.
Neolin offered a selective return to the old ways, interwoven with promises of heavenly rewards for
the faithful and damnation for skeptics. Heaven, the Delaware prophet assured his disciples,
contained only Indians. Within months, his doctrine spread from the Ohio Valley to the
great lakes. By early 1763, every Algonquin tribe had its devotees, awakened to a religious
and cultural movement that superseded tribal and village loyalties. Neolin taught that Indians
must abandon their sacred medicine bags, which were the playthings of evil spirits, and instead
prayed directly to the great spirit, better known to the Shani as the master of life.
They must force-wear rum, and purify themselves by drinking and vomiting and herbal tea.
The Shani's drank and spewed the concoction with such enthusiasm that their village
of Wakatomica became known to white traders as Vomit Town.
Regurgitating herbs was one thing, but few Indians took seriously Neolin's admonition
to abstain from sexual intercourse far more frequently than the Indian belief in the
competing sources of male and female power dictated, nor his insistence that fire made
with steel and flint was in pure flames, he said, should be started only by rubbing sticks together.
Easier to accept, because it entailed no immediate sacrifice, was Neolin's call for the gradual
abandonment of European trade goods and firearms, a seven-year transition from guns
to bows and arrows. So that's really interesting on a number of levels, because not only do we have
what I mentioned already, this sort of cultural revival framework in which it's not only important
to abandon foreign cultural elements, but there's this, it's not like sex is a European cultural
phenomenon, right? There's also just this greater emphasis on personal restraint, this
sort of like, oh, okay, like, we've been indulgent in some way and we're being punished for it.
And the way to please the divine agent of that punishment is by some sort of heroic act of
restraint, say in the realm of, you know, sexuality that sound kind of familiar, right? And then
even this emphasis, this shift in emphasis to a really primary focus on the afterlife and on the,
you know, the transcendental realm that succeeds this one that people can go to if they adhere to
certain rigid behavioral protocols, which is distinguished from the pit of, you know, the
lake of fire and suffering and whatnot that everybody else is going to go to, right? These are
some like very specific conceptions that are by no means universal to all forms of religious
experience that seem to come up with awfully, you know, with considerable frequency in certain
contexts where people are trying to explain their collective misfortune, their subjugation
by somebody else, and, you know, to propose some kind of remedy for it. There's always this weird
intermingling of forms of redress that are supposedly going to happen here on earth, you
know, we've got to like pray and prepare ourselves and be pure so that whatever the divine agent
is can come to this earth and cast our enemies into the sea. But also there's this world after
this one where we're going to go to where all of these problems just don't exist anymore and the
planes are thick with bison and, you know, the white men are gone or whatever, you know,
or it's only Jews or whatever the case happens to be. If you want a great account of the
religious milieu from which what we think of as Judaism and, you know, the sort of cultural
and archaeological milieu from which Israel, the Jewish people emerged, I really recommend a book
by a guy named Mark Smith called The Early History of God, Yahweh and the Other Deities in Ancient
Israel, which describes how what is known to archaeology to some extent and in the Bible as
Canaanite religion was kind of really fundamentally indistinguishable from
Israelite religion at one point. That's why there are all of these references. If you're
somebody who's familiar, if you've read like Exodus or any of that stuff, you know, there's
all of these references to the people of Israel worshiping a golden calf and all this stuff and
that's a reference to Baal, to, you know, this other deity who contended for primacy in the
pantheon of the Jewish people for quite a while. But yeah, generally speaking, the book describes
their transition to monotheism and how it was intended to reinforce a unique social identity
in the face of various threats, you know, in the context of various acts of aggression and
threats of cultural disillusion. And so in that process, you know, in that sort of process of
contraction of asserting of schismogenesis to use that, you know, that anthropological term
of asserting an identity via asserting a set of distinctions with everybody else's identity
around you, this emphasis on purity, on it becoming increasingly forbidden, increasingly
filled with unthinkable consequences to worship any deity, but the one true deity and all that stuff.
Yeah, it's a great book to get into that stuff. It's kind of an academic book, but I think it's
pretty readable for most people. So anyway, you know, it's true that by the time Jesus came
onto the scene, there, the nation of Israel had just undergone an extraordinary succession of
subjugations by a huge range of different, you know, centers of power that flourished for however long
they did. And the long exhausting, some might argue largely fucking pointless history of various
centers of power coming into existence and conquering and subjugating everybody and carrying
everybody off in chains and smashing all the, the, you know, icons in the local temples and then
being subjugated and dominated in turn at infiditum, you know, by the time that Jesus came around,
Israel had been conscious of an identity forged in the crucible of opposition to others and
you know, in a reciprocal relationship of hostilities of, you know, successive waves of
domination and subjugation in relation to many other people for like a long, long time.
I will quote from this book by Riza Aslan, Zealot, The Life and Times of Jesus of Nazareth,
to give us some sense of that long history in which this identity formed and these sort of like the
mental, the cultural template for what a messiah was had been generated by all, by this prolonged
history of national subjugations and then subsequent national liberations by various,
you know, heroic figures. So this book, Zealot, is also what we'll rely on pretty more or less
exclusively to kind of like talk about the nature of the messiah construct that Jesus was emulating
in his career. So he says, Roman Dominion over Jerusalem began in 63 BCE. When Rome's master
tactician Pompey Magnus entered the city with his conquering legions and laid siege to the temple.
By then, Jerusalem had long since passed its economic and cultural zenith.
The Canaanite settlement that King David had recast into the seat of his kingdom,
the city he had passed to his wayward son Solomon, who built the first temple to God,
sacked and destroyed by the Babylonians in 586 BCE. The city that had served as the
religious, economic and political capital of the Jewish nation for a thousand years was,
by the time Pompey strode through its gates, recognized less for its beauty and grandeur
than for the religious fervor of its troublesome population.
It is not that Jerusalem was unaccustomed to invasion and occupation.
Despite its exalted status in the hearts of the Jews, the truth is that Jerusalem was
little more than a trifle to be passed among a succession of kings and emperors who took turns
plundering and despoiling the sacred city on their way to far grander ambitions.
In 586 BCE, the Babylonians, masters of Mesopotamia rampaged through Judea,
raising both Jerusalem and its temple to the ground. The Babylonians were conquered by the
Persians, who allowed the Jews to return to their beloved city and rebuild their temple,
because they admired the Jews or took their religion seriously,
but because they considered Jerusalem an irrelevant backwater of little interest
or concern to an empire that stretched the length of Central Asia.
The Persian Empire and Jerusalem with it fell to the armies of Alexander the Great,
whose descendants imbued the city and its inhabitants with Greek culture and ideas.
Upon Alexander's untimely death in 323 BCE, Jerusalem was passed as spoils to the
Ptolemaic dynasty and ruled from distant Egypt. Though only briefly.
In 198 BCE, the city was rested from Ptolemaic control by the cellucid king Antiochus the
Great, whose son Antiochus Epiphanes fancied himself God incarnate and strove to put an
end once and for all to the worship of the Jewish deity in Jerusalem.
But the Jews responded to this blasphemy with a relentless guerrilla war led by the stouthearted
sons of Matthias the Hasmonean, the Maccabees, who reclaimed the holy city from cellucid control
in 164 BCE and for the first time in four centuries restored Jewish hegemony over Judea.
For the next hundred years, the Hasmoneans ruled God's land with an iron fist.
They were priest kings, each sovereign serving both king of the Jews and high priest of the
temple. But when civil war broke out between the brothers Hercannus and Arista Bolas over
control of the throne, each brother foolishly reached out to Rome for support. Pompey took
the brothers and treaties as an invitation to seize Jerusalem for himself, thus putting
an end to the brief period of direct Jewish rule over the city of God. In 63 BCE, Judea became a Roman
protectorate and the Jews were made once again a subject people. Forgive the weariness in my voice.
But it is just such a stupid way to live. The history is just kind of exhausting, right?
I mean, we really could be using all of that energy, all of that vitality, all of that mental
whatever. We could be doing something else with it. Anyway, so this is when the messianic trajectory
that Jesus is firmly, or the messianic tradition, legacy, I guess, that Jesus is firmly one
permutation of many of, kind of really beacons. And it begins, I'm not at all going to do any
kind of justice to the full history of, I mean, nobody can. A lot of aspirants to
the title of Messiah during this period of time are lost to history, but I'm not even going to
enumerate every one of those that we do have some kind of historical record of.
But yeah, from the period 63 BCE until about the temple in Jerusalem was destroyed a few years
earlier. But the very last of the resistance fighters, the famous, the people who all committed
suicide rather famously in the fortress of Masata, rather than essentially be killed by the Romans.
That final confrontation happened in 73 of the common era. So for about 110 years,
there was this sort of period of, I guess, particularly rich messianic fervor. There was
actually a second rebellion against Roman rule, a second Jewish war between Rome and Israel that
took place, maybe like a century later or so. But it was less historically notable in a lot of
ways. And the phase of messianic expectation and activity that led up to it and that comprised,
it was nowhere near as intense. But yeah, for this period of a little more than a century,
the Messiahs just come fast and thick. So there's kind of three fundamental categories of
these people with strongly overlapping fuzzy boundaries that we could identify all
of which are based on Old Testament tradition. So all of which are recapitulations of figures who
are central to existing stories within the Jewish religion. So you kind of have the
Moses style messiahs who are more like the wonder working liberators. They're going to
they're going to deliver the Jewish people through some miracle. There's going to be this
tremendous act of faith. And then God is going to be sufficiently pleased by this expression of
faith, faith to intervene. And like I said, this is the like, and then the mountains will
cast off, the earth will devour the fortresses of our overlords or the sea will rise up
to devour them or maybe part to let us through and then close back up over the people who are
pursuing us or whatever. But something in that vein. And then there's the messiahs more in the
mold. There's the King David style tradition, which is just a military liberator. This person's
going to gather some forces and post up somewhere out of the way of the occupying army
and then make lightning strikes on the on the occupation forces and gradually build up strength
and militarily defeat the occupiers. And then there's also kind of there's more just like the
maybe these people aren't exactly messiahs, but there's people who are just kind of
recapitulating the prophetic tradition, like John the Baptist, who are just there to kind of
tell the story, like establish a framework and set expectations for a certain kind of political,
religious, cultural, you know, behavior to ensue. So the first really notable messiah figure from
this period is Hezekiah, who's kind of firmly in the Davidic mold, the military mold.
And, you know, so shortly after Roman rule is established, the succession of policy decisions
involving a consolidation of wealth and power by the the Jewish ruling class
left a lot of people homeless and unemployed and, you know, a lesson providing a lesson that
the Bush administration failed to internalize in dispossessing all of the security forces in Iraq
when they invaded. You know, it's it can often lead to problems to just kind of make a whole
population of people like very suddenly homeless and like dispossessed of any sort of stable
routine or prospects for survival. And so a movement, a resistance movement rose up that
kind of navigated the tension between us is very often the case with revolutionary movements,
you know, sort of like fighting on behalf of some broader national liberation objective and
just kind of stealing and killing at a sufficient scale to survive. Right. But this is
often a problem. You can't you can't liberate the nation if you don't do something to survive.
And so, you know, at least some of your actions have to have that kind of immediate material
consequence. And so within this within this diffuse movement of former farmer,
bandit revolutionaries, a guy named Hezekiah, who was the leader of one of these crews,
openly declared himself to be the Messiah, the promised one who would restore Jews to glory to
quote from zealot. Messiah means anointed one. The title alludes to the practice of pouring or
smearing oil on someone charged with divine office, a king like Saul or David or Solomon,
a priest like Aaron and his sons who were concentrated to do God's work, a prophet like
Isaiah or Alicia who bore a special relationship with God, an intimacy that comes with being
designated God's representative on earth. And then Herod was appointed the governor of Galilee
by the Roman administration and organized a force to subdue this resistance and
Hezekiah as a result was captured and decapitated and that movement for a little while
sort of subsided. But then, quoting again from zealot, in Piraea, a former slave of Herod's,
in imposing giant of a man named Simon, crowned himself Messiah and rallied together a group
of bandits to plunder the royal palaces at Jericho. The rebellion ended when Simon was
captured and beheaded. A short while later, another messianic aspirant, a poor shepherd boy
named Anthrongeus, placed a crown upon his head and launched a foolhardy attack against Roman forces.
He too was caught and executed. As far as particularly noteworthy Messiahs are concerned,
this takes us up to about the time that Jesus of Nazareth was born. Herod, somewhere in the
intervening years between subjugating the bandit revolutionary forces led by Hezekiah
and his death had become appointed kind of a client king of Israel, a king in the sense that
he was there to orchestrate Roman policy and secure Roman domination. And so shortly after
he died in 4 BCE, then Jesus was born, and a few years later, in six of the common era,
the sort of client-king relationship, the puppet state, as we might call it today,
relationship, was ended. And Rome was subject to a more direct form, or rather Jerusalem,
was subject to a more direct form of Roman rule with Roman governors, with names like
Pontus Pilate, in charge of the day-to-day administration of affairs and the routine execution
of would-be Messiahs. And at this time, when Jesus was born, and as he, during the time of
his career, simply saying, I am the Messiah or hey, that guy over there is the Messiah,
was punishable by crucifixion. It didn't mean this person has come to
unite humanity in a transcendental, liberatory state of being that negates the significance of
all earthly affairs. And he's come to suffer for us in order to transmute all of the agonies
of being alive in the corporeal world into something beautiful and lacking in adversity or
anything like that. It meant this person is the one who is going to delete. It meant a lot of
things. There were a lot of conceptions of exactly what the identity of the Messiah would be like,
what traits one should expect to be associated with the Messiah, which prophetic traditions
would become realized because it was kind of not possible at that point. There was such a
bewildering landscape of prophetic traditions about the Messiah that weren't necessarily mutually
consistent. They couldn't all come true. But what it definitely meant in all cases,
whenever anybody said that, is this is the person who is going to liberate us from
domination by a foreign power and realize the kingdom of God in the sense that the kingdom of
God is not a new state of affairs over all the earth involving all of its peoples. The kingdom of
God is Israel, and to recognize or deliver the kingdom of God is to achieve a state of affairs
where Israel is ruled by the people of Israel. Quoting Zealot,
To call Jesus the Messiah is to place him inexorably on a path already well-trodden by a host of
failed messiahs who came before him toward conflict, revolution, and war against the prevailing
powers. Where that path would ultimately lead, no one at the festival, he's talking about, you know,
an account in the New Testament of one of the first times that Jesus is called by somebody,
the Messiah, no one at the festival could know for sure. But there was some sense of where
the path must begin. In other words, that these particular conditions of the life trajectory,
the career trajectory of a Messiah had to, you know, have certain contours, had to have a certain,
fulfill certain criteria. But before Jesus could get around to growing up, declaring himself or
being declared by others, Messiah, and getting killed for it, a number of other people had to
go through a very similar process. So around the time of the birth of Jesus, shortly after
Herod's death, quoting Zealot, it was around this time that a new and far more fearsome group of
bandits arose in Galilee led by a magnetic teacher and revolutionary known as Judas the Galilean.
The traditions say that Judas was the son of the famed bandit chief Hezekiah, the failed
Messiah, whom Herod had captured and beheaded 40 years earlier as part of his campaign to clear
the countryside of the bandit menace. After Herod's death, Judas the Galilean joined forces with a
mysterious Pharisee named Zadok to launch a wholly new independence movement that Josephus
terms the fourth philosophy, so as to differentiate it from the other three philosophies, the
Pharisees, the Sadducees, and the Essians. What set the members of the fourth philosophy
apart from the rest was their unshakable commitment to freeing Israel from foreign rule
and their fervent insistence, even unto death, that they would serve no Lord save the one God.
And so what happened to Judas the Galilean? Well, wouldn't you know it? He was captured by Rome
and killed, and 2,000 or so of his rebel army or their sympathizers were crucified all at once,
and the city that they had seized from Roman domination was burned to the ground.
The male inhabitants were all slaughtered and the women and children were auctioned off as slaves.
So Pontus Pilate shows up to be governor of Jerusalem in 26th of the common era,
and the next particularly notable execution for sedition comes in the form of John the Baptist,
who was Jesus's teacher, and in some way seems to have been a very significant model for Jesus.
He was executed sometime around 30 of the common era, and so a few years after John is executed,
Jesus has his only moment of, a lot of these messianic scenarios
are pretty, are announced and then pretty hastily resolved, right? The tragic, the tragic demise
in the torturous execution often takes place very, very shortly after the initial emergence,
the announcement of someone as a claimant to the title of Messiah, and Jesus is one such case.
The Gospels record a couple years of his ministry, of him going around and performing these types
of miracles that were, like I said, not exactly uncommon in that time and place. Here's another
quick quote, you know, so there was a ton of consensus that Jesus was, regardless of whether
people considered him the Messiah, people thought him to be solid, you know, a solid
representative of this tradition of wonder workers that was so hyperabundant at this time.
So, to quote real quickly to give some sense of the nature of this tradition. Again, Jesus was not
the only miracle worker toiling through Palestine, healing the sick and casting out demons. This was
a world steeped in magic, and Jesus was just one of an untold number of diviners and dream
interpreters, magicians and medicine men who wandered Judea and Galilee. There was
Hony the Circle Drawer, so named because during a time of drought, he drew a circle in the dirt and
stood inside it. I swear about your great name that I will not move from here until you have mercy
on your sons, Hony shouted up to God, and the rains came at once. Hony's grandsons, Abba,
Hilka and Hanan the Hidden were also widely credited with miraculous deeds, both lived
in Galilee around the same time as Jesus. Another Jewish miracle worker, Rabbi Hanana Ben Dosa,
who resided in the village of Ereb just a few kilometers from Jesus' home in Nazareth,
had the power to pray over the sick and even intercede on their behalf to discern who would
live and who would die. Perhaps the most famous miracle worker of the time was Apollonius of
Tyanna, described as a holy man who taught the concept of a supreme God. Apollonius performed
miraculous deeds everywhere he went. He healed the lame, the blind, the paralytic. He even raised a
girl from the dead. Nor was Jesus the soul exorcist in Palestine. The itinerant Jewish exorcist
was a familiar sight, and exorcisms themselves could be a lucrative enterprise. Many exorcists
are mentioned in the Gospels. Some, like the famed exorcist Eleazar, who may have been an
Essene, used amulets and incantations to draw demons out of the afflicted through their noses.
Others, such as Rabbi Solomon Ben Yochai, could cast out demons simply by uttering the demon's name.
Like Jesus, Yochai would first command the demon to identify itself, which then gave him
authority over it. Exorcism instructions have even been found within the Dead Sea Scrolls.
That was these kind of miracle workings comprised the vast, vast majority of Jesus's
few years long career. Most of the Gospels are concerned with is him going around and healing
the sick and the blind, and giving sermons that are awfully opaque in a lot of cases, which
there's more or less a scholarly consensus that there is some source document of just the
quotations of Jesus that all of the four canonical Gospels, the four Gospels in the New
Testament, are heavily reliant on for his actual quotes. That's kind of like a whole,
whole lot of the substance of any of those books, although they vary considerably in the stories
that they tell, and kind of their emphases, John, the last of them being by far the most
transcendental, mystically oriented. But they all are largely concerned with the
performance of a bunch of miracles and acts of healings interspersed with some pretty cryptic
preaching, and then it all culminating in exactly one act of what could be described as
confrontation with the existing power structure. He spends a few years kind of developing a status
as a potential messiah in the in the wonder working tradition and the generator of miracles,
the potential candidate for convincing God to intervene with some profound rearrangements of
the everyday laws of nature on behalf of the liberation of the Jews,
like kind of developing a status as potentially that kind of messiah. And then his career culminates
in him going to Jerusalem. He has stayed well away from it up until this point,
likely aware that some of what he's claiming wouldn't go over super well. And so we can
see this as a particular style of politics. Again, a revolutionary is somebody who inhabits
this liminal zone, the respective margins of what is happening right now in people's expectation
of what is going to happen, where a sufficient degree of expectation that things are going to
radically change can indeed sometimes affect those radical changes. And so he's not at all
approaching Jerusalem with any kind of military strategy, with any kind of concrete pragmatic
scenario that he's pursuing to affect any kind of change in the existing order.
But he is going there to kick off a revolution. And the notion is that he's going to have
such a profound effect on people's consciousness that he is going to have
such a decisive effect on people's expectations, people's perceptions of the social order that
it's going to change the social order. He's going to blow everybody's minds, right? Because
that's what he does. That's his profession. And so he shows up, he enters Jerusalem in a way that is
very precisely calculated to fulfill certain expectations from certain scriptural expectations.
He comes riding on a donkey, people have sawed off palm branches and are waving them in this
sort of joyful, triumphant celebration. And so we're recapitulating some Old Testament
prophecy here, or rather, fulfilling it. And then he goes into, and this is something that
all the Gospels are clear on, and this part is thought by historians to have definitely happened,
he goes into the sort of outer courtyard. There's sort of like successive echelons
of the Jewish temple. So the interior most portion, holy of holies, is a place that only the high
priests can enter. And that's where direct interaction with God happens, right? And then
there's another sort of like an echelon of the temple surrounding that, where other priests can be
and where the sacrifices are performed. Because during, you know, during certain periods,
there's sort of like brisk trade and sacrifice going on, you know, 24 hours a day,
Jewish people can come pay for an animal to be sacrificed, they can't bring one,
they have to give this certain this priestly class, who is essentially identical to the ruling class,
the landed aristocracy, who are collaborators with the Roman power structure. This is one of
the primary ways that they materially benefit in the social order, they have to be paid for
Jews to fulfill their religious obligations. So there's a place outside of the sort of like
priestly echelon where people can come and make these transactions. There's a place that only Jewish
men are allowed to, a place where Jewish women can access that, you know, is outside of where Jewish
men can go. And then there's a court of the Gentiles surrounding it all, where all kinds of commerce
is happening, you know, people are selling animals to be sacrificed. People are, as we all
probably the vast majority of us know from New Testament language, there's people who are doing
currency exchange, money changers, you know, people are also just like selling food, right?
There's like, you know, people are selling souvenirs and stuff like that. And anybody as well can
be there, you know, Roman citizens, whoever, and any ethnicity, there's no restrictions on who
can be there. And Jesus sees this as, you know, a cynical form of commercialism and, of course,
a desecration of the sanctity and ethnic purity that we're supposed to associate with Jerusalem
and certainly with the temple. And so he rages against all of this and drives some people,
not just some money changers, but people who are, you know, various kinds of merchants,
that he frees a bunch of the animals who are there to be sold and sacrificed and, you know,
knock some stuff over or whatever. He and his followers retreat to the Mount of Olives,
to the east of the temple. And while hiding out on the western slope with the Mountain
of Olives in the Garden of Gassaman, at night, Jesus' party is apprehended by a large and well
armed cohort of Roman soldiers. And there is a brief conflict where there's some injuries,
but ultimately he's apprehended and crucified. And that is that. And from the perspective
of his politics, from the perspective of what Jesus was actually concerned with,
the story of the Messiah just kind of continues. He's won in a very long legacy of people who've
tried this out to quote from Zealot. Declared guilty, Jesus is sent to Golgotha to be crucified
alongside two other men who are specifically called Lestai, bandits. And he's already explained
the terminology for bandits since the time of Hezekiah's deeply interrelated with the notion
of a revolutionary. As with every criminal who hangs on a cross, Jesus is given a plaque or
titillus detailing the crime for which he is being crucified. Jesus' titillus reads,
King of the Jews, his crime striving for kingly rule, sedition. And so, like every
bandit and revolutionary, every rabble-rousing zealot and apocalyptic prophet who came before
or after him, like Hezekiah and Judas, Theodos and Andhronges, the Egyptian in the Samaritan,
Simon's son of Giora, and Simon's son of Kokba, Jesus of Nazareth is killed for daring to
claim the mantle of king and Messiah. And so, this story simply continues. The liberation
of Israel remains a primary focus for large numbers of people, and there is an intensive
succession of Messiahs after him. In fact, it's really after Jesus dies that the messianic fervor,
if anything, intensifies and becomes more politically salient. It's really not like
anything, what he did didn't work. He didn't so fundamentally reconfigure everybody's expectations
that it was, you know, that everybody simultaneously rose up and presented such an incredible
show of force to the Roman occupiers that they couldn't arrest and kill them or anything like
that. And it's really after he is executed that messianic fervor reaches a truly fever pitch,
culminating in this actual, in what he was trying to precipitate, in this actual outright,
large-scale rebellion against Roman rule. Quoting again from zealot, by mid-century,
the whole of Palestine was buzzing with messianic energy. In 44 of the common era, a wonder-working
prophet named Theodos crowned himself Messiah and brought hundreds of followers to the Jordan,
promising to part the river just as Moses had done at the Sea of Reeds a thousand years earlier.
This, he claimed, would be the first step in reclaiming the Promised Land from Rome.
The Romans, in response, dispatched an army to lop off Theodos' head and scattered his followers
into the desert. In 46 of the common era, two sons of Judas the Galilean, Jacob and Simon,
so in other words, grandsons of Hezekiah, Jacob and Simon, launched their own revolutionary
movement in the footsteps of their father and grandfather. Both were crucified for their actions.
The next really notable development along these lines doesn't as much involve a single
charismatic messianic figure but is more in the mode of, you know, shadowy, a shadowy group that can
emerge anywhere and, you know, can strike anywhere and then retreat back into darkness,
the Sikare, which means daggermen, were so named because they had a penchant for using these small,
easily conceivable daggers. They had a fondness for executing public figures in broad daylight
and then just kind of merging back into the crowds and escaping undetected. And their most
notable political action was the killing of one of the high priests in the year 56.
The high priest was named Jonathan and quoting again,
with Jonathan's death, the messianic ardor in Jerusalem reached fever pitch. There was a
widespread sense among the Jews that something profound was happening, a feeling born of desperation,
nurtured by a people yearning for freedom from foreign rule. Zeal, the spirit that had fueled
the revolutionary fervor of the bandits, prophets and messiah, was now coursing through the
population like a virus working its way through the body. No longer could it be contained in the
countryside. Its influence was being felt in the towns and cities, even in Jerusalem. It was not
just the peasants and outcasts who were whispering about the great kings and prophets who had freed
Israel from her enemies in the past. The wealthy and upwardly mobile were also becoming
increasingly animated by the fervent desire to cleanse the holy land of the Roman occupation.
The signs were everywhere. The scriptures were about to be fulfilled. The end of days was at hand.
So once again we should note here how this kind of particular form of craziness that is so
inextricably seemingly intertwined with revolutionary activity. The sense that
forces beyond mere human agency, that there's cosmological forces at work in this
revolutionary process, how this language sounds so much like the language that's used to talk about
the anticipated shifts in the nature of the worldly order and the dramatic
reconfiguration of what existence means in contemporary Christianity, where this is all,
where that reconfiguration, where the transformation is not in terms of power dynamics here on
earth but this entirely, this shift from worldly affairs mattering or being real at all towards
this final phase of the transcendence where we all are born up into heaven or descend
into the lake of fire and there's the final reckoning. But you can see how at the time this
was very much about something that was the same set of expectations, the same fundamental psychology,
the same narrative structure was employed in service of something that was supposed to
happen here on earth. And so Zealot continues in Jerusalem, a holy man named Jesus, son of Ananias,
so Jesus wasn't even the only guy named Jesus who aspired to be Messiah. But in Jerusalem,
a holy man named Jesus, son of Ananias, suddenly appeared prophesying the destruction of the city
and the imminent return of the Messiah. Another man, a mysterious Jewish sorcerer called
the Egyptian, declared himself king of the Jews and gathered thousands of followers on the Mount
of Olives, where he vowed that, like Joshua and Jericho, he would bring the walls of Jerusalem
tumbling down at his command. The crowd was massacred by Roman troops, though as far as anyone
knows the Egyptian escaped. And so finally in 66, Israel engages in full-scale military conflict
in order to end Roman domination. And that rebellion was horribly defeated. The reconquest
of Jerusalem, essentially the Roman emperor and the military commander there in Israel,
got into a mood of essentially saying, rather than simply subjugating these people,
why don't we entirely destroy them? And so they destroyed the temple, they utterly, utterly
ravaged Jerusalem. And a huge proportion of the Jewish population was sent into some kind of exile
or into slavery or whatever. But the rebellion was just horribly, horribly defeated. And even
in a people who had experienced a huge number of subjugations, arguably that particular defeat
registered as a particularly significant trauma.
And so, you know, isn't it strange that the sort of the fundamental political trajectory
of which Jesus was a part certainly didn't culminate with him, you know, but rather culminated a few
decades after his death, and was ultimately unsuccessful. And, you know, so isn't it curious
that we don't talk much about the mysterious Jewish sorcerer, not only as the Egyptian,
or much about Hezekiah, the bandit chief, or his son or his grandsons. But we do talk about this one
guy who like so many of these other people in this long, rich legacy made some kind of effort
towards inciting a revolution failed and was executed for sedition. You know, so what is the
difference? Well, it's, you know, it's that he rose from the dead, right? That's that's the big
distinction. And in Mark, you know, we might if we don't take that literally, we might of course
want to know what happened if there's if there's anything to this story other than people just
kind of, you know, saying, Hey, you wouldn't believe it, but you check this out. I knew this
guy, you know, whatever. But but in Mark, it's said that if you've been hearing this nasty rumor
that the disciples of Jesus stole his body in order to stage some kind of resurrection spectacle,
that's because the priestly class bribed some Roman guards, who I guess maybe were supposed to
be looking after the body or something to say that they saw this happen. So, you know, that gives us
some sense that rather than a totally, totally post hoc, you know, just story that somebody
decided to make up at some point, Jesus's followers might have decided that in political terms,
again, noting that, you know, the whole kind of that the nature of the Messiah figure is very
much wrapped up in in the expectations people have about reality and how they become self
fulfilling, that they might have decided that the best way politically to make use of this
tragic defeat that they had just experienced was to do something unprecedented in terms of the
mental, the kind of like cultural template that existed for messiahs. There is nothing at all about
this in any Jewish scripture. You know, it's interesting it said in the New Testament that,
you know, he would he died and in rose as was foretold by the prophets of old,
but the prophets of old said no such thing. There's nothing in the Old Testament about how
when the Messiah comes, he's going to be crucified and then three days later rise from the dead or
anything like that. But, you know, they may have decided this would be that he is a wonder
worker after all, like this would be some good theater or whatever. And they might have, in some
manner, you know, who knows, it's not like people were using facial recognition software,
they might have not only stolen the body, but somebody might have, you know, because it's like
the way that it's presented in the Old Testament is like, he doesn't stick around long, he doesn't
do much, but he kind of shows up in these few discreet episodes and like has a conversation
or like shows himself to, you know, certain numbers of people exactly once and then takes
off. So it's even conceivable that these traditions preserve some reality of them not only stealing
the body, but, you know, staging some spectacle where people who had some sense of what he's
supposed to look like or some attribute they might associate with him, you know,
that somebody kind of basically dresses up like him or something. I don't know. But in any case,
this narrative, whatever else is true about it, is a major deviation from any expectation people
have about the Messiah, just to quote again real quick.
The problem for the early church is that Jesus did not fit in any of the Messianic paradigms
offered in the Hebrew Bible, nor did he fulfill a single requirement expected of the Messiah. Jesus
spoke about the end of days, but it did not come to pass, not even after the Romans destroyed
Jerusalem and defiled God's temple. He promised that God would liberate the Jews from bondage,
but God did no such thing. He vowed that the 12 tribes of Israel would be reconstituted and
the nation restored. Instead, the Romans expropriated the Promised Land, slaughtered its
inhabitants and exiled the survivors. The kingdom of God that Jesus predicted never arrived. The
New World Order he described never took shape. According to the standards of the Jewish religion
in the Hebrew scriptures, Jesus was as successful in his Messianic aspirations as any of the other
would be Messiahs. So something happens here that requires a gradual evolution with a great
deal of conceptual slippage or in any case, you know, conceptual change, where eventually the kingdom
of God that he's predicting and promising becomes something other than a place here on earth.
But it's not at all like this at first. At first, the people in the movement that Jesus was
associated with are hanging out in Jerusalem. And they're saying that Jesus was crucified,
he rose from the dead, and he said, hang on a second, I got to go take care of some things,
but I'm going to be right back. And when I come back, I'm going to liberate Israel from Roman
domination. So the fundamental political objective of this movement, the fundamental
political status of the Messiah hasn't changed at all, right? It's just taken on this kind of
bizarre novel, new supernatural characteristic. But hey, it's one of many, you know, I mean,
he's already been raising people from the dead. And you know, Messiahs are already associated
with parting seas and all this other stuff. So it kind of fits. It's kind of congruent,
broadly speaking, with this long tradition. And so the people associated with the Jesus movement
are, they're right there, you know, they're there. It's not that Jesus is going to come back
generations from now, and reconfigure what it means to be human or whatever. He's going to come
back like in a few days, or maybe weeks, or maybe even a month as time goes on. But he's coming right
back and he is going to do what he always intended to do in the first place. He's going to liberate
Israel from Rome. And you know, then days turn into weeks, months, years eventually. But these
people keep hanging out and they're very fervent, you know, they're like, we saw this happen.
So this is still, they are still within this broader context of the messy, the general messianic
fervor that's everywhere in Israel that Riza Aslan is describing in Zealot. And they're just kind of
one of these many factions who's describing a particular trajectory, you know, making a
particular set of predictions about what national liberation looks like. And then
Jerusalem is destroyed. And here is where Jesus starts to just become something totally
other than what he was. Here is where Jesus becomes an apolitical transcendental being.
Because there are some people who this story about the resurrection is already kind of taking
on a life of its own. What began as a political narrative expedient is being more and more
related to on its own terms. The story of, hey, a guy rose from the dead and that means Israel
is going to be liberated is increasingly already becoming a story, especially among the people
who have left Israel and are talking about it with other people elsewhere. It's already
becoming more and more a story that's just like, hey, this guy rose from the dead. There's this guy
who worked all these miracles and then he was crucified and he rose from the dead.
This is becoming a narrative unto itself, quoting Zealot in the years to come, the Jews
would begin to distance themselves as much as possible from the revolutionary idealism
that had led to the war with Rome. The rabbis of the second century would be compelled by
circumstances and by fear of Roman reprisal to develop an interpretation of Judaism that
eschewed nationalism. They would come to view the Holy Land in more transcendental terms,
fostering a messianic theology that rejected overt political ambitions as acts of piety
and the study of the law took the place of temple sacrifices in the life of the observant Jew.
And so here we must begin to note some striking parallels between this process of conceptual
transformation of religion, which let us recall James Scott in the beginning of this episode,
was at the time the framework in which politics was conceived of and conducted.
And, you know, parallels between these conceptual changes that happened 2000 years ago
and the way that power dynamics and politics are talked about and conducted now. And, you know,
the first parallel we can note is that on some level there's this real similarity
between what's happening here with the depoliticization of these religious traditions
and the, and in particular the shift in focus, the increasingly, the increasing emphasis on these
transcendental aspects of the life of Jesus, the resurrection narrative as a self-willed act,
as a decision that Jesus made to suffer in a certain way, to affect a form of collective
redemption. And the ways that the nature of victory is reconceived in political movements that any
number of us may have had direct experience with, the way that in the simplest form, you know,
the way that you and your friends decide to go stop something from happening, you know, you're
going to go hold like a series of protests or blockade something or whatever in order to affect
some very concrete outcome, you know, we are going to stop this giant piece of equipment from reaching
the tar sands or, you know, we are going to convince these policy makers to not allow
the construction of this facility or whatever, right? And then you go through all this, you invest,
you take the emotional risk of hope, you do the thing that is required of all of us to engage
not only in revolutionary politics, but to try to exert any kind of agency in this world of any
kind, you let yourself go a little bit of that very particular kind of crazy that is necessary
to get things done in this world where you start to kind of sense you feel you're willing to
just entertain that you're willing to experience the sense of agency that quickly becomes kind
of unlimited where you're like, I don't know, maybe I'm capable of anything, you know.
And then it turns out that you're not even capable of doing the thing that you were trying
to do. You lose, you fail. And what we see so often in those moments is that movements,
political groups, individuals within them, very frequently don't say, okay, we totally
decisively failed. And we should really evaluate that. Like, you know, we can use this,
we can do science here, basically, and ask ourselves why this was the outcome.
Instead, what happens is that people say, well, actually, this is victory, right?
So we have it happens to be the case that we didn't achieve our immediate mandate,
but we, whatever, we built a movement. And now we can expect some kind of exponential
move, you know, progression in this direction that we've started to go in. And so pretty soon,
you know, the world will be ours, or you even see forms of it in more liberal circles that are,
you know, statements of one kind or another to the effect of we didn't win, and we didn't even
build a movement, but we revealed the nature of the power that, that we were in conflict with.
And now everybody can see that their only way that, you know, the world they're creating
requires violence. They can't win an argument, they have to use dirty tricks of some kind or
another. And this is ostensibly, we are supposed to understand going to somehow undermine their
ability to keep doing exactly the thing they did, you know, to defeat you in the first place.
But then even more, and so I think, you know, that's, there's definitely,
there's definitely a symmetry here. And then of course, what we see, like I talked about in
the ashes of the World Tree episode is, is what we see is that because people don't approach
their political activities in this kind of scientific framework or whatever,
it's often like people's trajectories within people's history of participation and movements
is like a phase of convincing themselves that these things are going to work that aren't going
to work. And then when that breaks down, when they can no longer convince themselves of that story,
that they always had to take some shortcuts of reasoning to convince themselves of
in the first place, when that is no longer tenable, then this, this categorical binary
is embraced where they flip a different switch and they're like, okay, well,
actually nothing is possible and humanity is fundamentally evil and the world is doomed.
Right. But yeah, so see, there's like a fundamental symmetry here with these processes of reasoning
about, about what people were trying to do in the first place, in the sense of like shifting,
you know, shifting how you conceive of your overall sort of project, your movement,
your, your collective endeavor, so that you're always kind of winning because really what
you're doing is embodying a certain way of being or emulating a certain, you know,
mode of relation with reality or whatever. And I think that quickly becomes very dangerous
because like I said at the beginning of this episode, I think we, the way to understand the world
we live in a very, you know, not, it's not the whole story of course, but I think you cannot
understand the world without understanding these feedback loops that exist between the societies
we inhabit and biology, where if you are always telling yourself a story in which, that, that excludes,
that doesn't require you to access the parts of yourself that think about fighting on real
world terms and can imagine actually contending for power and you're always telling yourself,
oh no, actually defeat is victory. Oh, you know, actually being, being tortured and executed by
the state for sedition is actually, is good actually, you know, dying is the new winning.
Then of course, the capacities that you have for, you know, accessing certain forms of agency
which are inherent within us that, you know, are our evolved potentials, you know, these things atrophy
and you become a very specific, a very particular kind of creature with a very particular
configuration of realized versus latent potentials. So I also think we can actually
note something very interesting in terms of the parallels between the audience that was
kind of initially receptive to Christianity in the Roman Empire in the first couple centuries of
the existence of Christianity and far more recent political and cultural movements
that have, I think in both cases we can see this really ineffective form of rejection of
the dominant value system and this conceptualization of rejecting it or
negating it in some fashion that doesn't involve any kind of real world
concrete pragmatic deliberations about strategy or moving anything around
here in corporeal reality, right? And in both cases it seems like there's this emergence of a
politics of self-expression or the negation of politics for self-expression that comes about
in these sort of disaffected populations that have these very particular features that are associated
with a fairly stable, fairly materially abundant affluent society. So what, you know, Ronald Engelhardt
described with the so-called post-materialist shift in societies that experience significant
material stability and abundance after World War II, I think kind of applies in some ways to these
kind of like sub-cultural populations that you see during the long decline of the Roman Empire,
you know, in those few centuries between the birth of Christ and the fall of the Roman Empire
or let's say those couple centuries between the birth of Christ and the adoption of Christianity as
a state religion in Rome, where there's a very similar kind of person in certain ways
to the counterculture or a very similar kind of culture in certain ways to the sort of like
more recent countercultures we see associated with, you know, contemporary industrialized societies
where that really was kind of like the meaning of Christianity in the first few centuries of
existence as it was adopted by people who weren't Jews. It was a way to express a disaffection
with the dominant value system to claim an identity other than
that of loyal Roman citizen, but that didn't involve any kind of real-world contestation
for power and it kind of seems like it has like the attraction was less any particular aspect
of the Christian doctrine in more the same way that you see people in the mid 20th century
in Western industrialized societies become so obsessed with wisdom that comes from just
anywhere else, you know, where it's like, did somebody on a far off mountain somewhere,
you know, to the east of here say it, then I'll take it, you know, where there's just this kind
of like very indiscriminate, very sort of like promiscuous hunger for assimilating doctrines
from just anywhere but where we're from, you know, the same kind of exoticism it seems to
be at work in informing a far more recent appetite for whatever, you know, yoga and
the appropriation of Native American ceremony and regalia and whatnot in recent times,
as did the allure of Christianity in, you know, the first, second, and third centuries of the
common era, I guess fourth to some extent and then of course it becomes a state religion and this
is a very curious state of affairs indeed if we are to take the conversion narrative of the emperor
Constantine at face value, you know, it doesn't really accord very well with his life. There are
conflicting accounts of how he also had maybe a separate religious vision or maybe it's just
a different description of the same religious vision where it is now Apollo rather than Christ
that he's encountering in the sky, you really do. Anyway, there's a number of pretty significant
indications that this was a political expedient and not much else. And how would we make sense
of that? Like what would that mean or what would that tell us considering that it certainly wasn't
Constantine's political objective to upend the Roman order or anything like that. Here's a quote
from a book called The Emperor Constantine by Hans Polsender. The prevailing spirit of Constantine's
government was one of conservatism. His conversion to and support of Christianity produced fewer
innovations than one might have expected. Indeed, they served an entirely conservative
event, the preservation and continuation of the empire. And so, you know, this is, it's curious
because certainly the way that people experienced Christianity was as, you know, a deviation or
a rejection of the dominant order and value system, like I said. And that's less at this
point. The whole religion really had been very depoliticized. And Jesus had at this point
really been assimilated to a number of his characteristics are now just kind of the
generic characteristics of a deity in that, you know, in that sort of like broader cultural
milieu around that time. You know, he now just like sort of has all of these characteristics
like a virgin birth and whatnot, all of these solar attributes that you would just kind of associate
with Sol Invictus or Mithras or sort of whoever, right? But there's nothing like really in the
actual doctrine exactly as it's explicitly conveyed that really seems like it would serve
imperial ends. And, you know, there's this sense of it just being a Xenic phenomenon and like
Xenophilia being kind of what motivates people's attraction to it. But here's the thing is that
the story of how Jesus's execution by the state for sedition didn't represent a failure in an
effort to actually achieve something in the actual world, but was actually this transcendental
self willed act of kind of negating participation or interest in the actual world on behalf of
some other kind of kingdom of God that's happening somewhere else that's happening within or happening
in the sky or wherever, right? This narrative had really profoundly shaped how people
instantiated their belief systems and Christian martyrdom had become this kind of unique
phenomenon in the Roman Empire where this story about how Jesus kind of intentionally
and with utter equanimity and the unshakable clarity of his vision and his profound divine
resolve had willingly submitted to torture and execution had inspired all of these people to
do exactly the same thing to express their devotion to this religion. And so there was this, the
Christians were this unique population in that they surrendered to state persecution in order,
you know, they really did perceive surrendering to persecution as kind of the highest validation
possible of their belief system. Saul, aka Paul, who probably really did more than anybody to affect
this transition from the Jesus movement as a political, you know, as a Jewish nationalist
messianic revolutionary movement into this transcendental phenomenon it became,
he said in a letter, are they Hebrews? So am I. Are the Israelites? So am I. Are they the seed of
Abraham? So am I. Are they the servants of Christ? I am a better one, though it may be foolish to
say so, with greater labors, more floggings, more imprisonments, and more often near death,
right? So here I can't help but noting the way it has always made me feel in the course of my
organizing life when somebody is talking about how great, you know, when somebody's like, oh guys,
check it out, we're doing so good. This time, you know, we didn't get 25 people arrested.
This time, 75 of our friends got put in cages. Isn't that great, you know, like, oh, this time
we didn't just get the police pointing their assault rifles at people. I mean, they really beat
the fuck out of someone's grandma and we got it on camera. We're winning, you know, it's like,
it's like that mindset was really, really primary, really prevalent and really primary to what being
a Christian meant in the first couple centuries of its existence when it was still illegal.
And I think that has absolutely everything to do with the decision to institute Christianity as
the official state religion of the Roman Empire. You know, and so the early conceptions of Jesus were
within the movement that he created were, they were diverse and there wasn't necessarily nearly
such an emphasis on, I mean, the Gospel of Mark doesn't even include a resurrection narrative.
It ends with, I forget the exact phrasing, but you know, it's something to the effect that
people see that the tomb of Jesus is empty and it just ends with the rather enigmatic statement
that they were terrified. So I can't, again, I can't remember exactly how it's phrased.
But you know, and like I said, in the first couple centuries, the most common type of iconography
involving the most common type of Christian iconography was Jesus with a wand performing
miracles, but eventually the crucifixion and the resurrection and the divine identity that is supposedly
expressed through this becomes very, very, very central so that, you know, of course,
what we think of when we think of Christianity is somebody, you know, is this agonized,
emaciated, you know, the tradition grows ever more sort of lurid in its,
in its like exquisite attention to the details of the suffering. And you know, so but by the
time that you're into the Middle Ages, you have like artists like Grunwald's The Small Crucifixion
or just these sort of like masterpieces of the depiction of just utter brutality and subjugation
and just complete negation of the dignity and the agency of in the end, you know, the fundamental
well being, obviously, of a human being. And with this conceptual framework associated with it,
where we're supposed to look at all that and not see it, we're not supposed to see
the state hurting somebody and that person simply suffering a terrible misfortune
and failing in their fundamental objectives. We're supposed to, you know, experience this gruesome
spectacle on one level, but then conceptualize it as this beautiful transcendental phenomenon
on another. And I think that this is one of the many aspects of our culture that radically
constrains the vast majority of people into a particular niche of their, you know, into accessing
or realizing or manifesting a very small subset of their overall evolved potentials, in particular
depriving people of any sense of meaningful agency in just really in general, establishing the
conditions of their own lives. But in particular, doing so in any way that acknowledges or
navigates the fact that there's aggression out there, that it's one of the ways that power and
agency are determined. And that there has to be some kind of strategy for dealing with that
if you're going to possess agency that you have to be able to deal with the aggression of others.
And now we have these kind of, now we have secular counterparts to all of this stuff.
But I don't think you can understand their development without understanding that they
really did emerge from this sort of preexisting strata of the conceptualization of self-world
and power that was originally a religious conception. So now, of course, we have, you know,
secular manifestations like the politics of nonviolence. And we have secular rituals like now
instead of experiencing that radical disconnect, that incongruity, where we're perceiving a
clear imagery of violence, a clear expression that violence is out there and it's being used
to determine the nature of power right here and now in the world we inhabit that we're supposed
to pretend we don't see, that we're supposed to not register the violent nature of instead of
the crucifixion, we have these secular rituals where anytime there's a protest, a mayor or a
police chief or whoever gets up in front of a podium flanked by dudes, you know, by police
in body armor wielding assault rifles who have armored vehicles and whatnot and whose job it is
to use violence to maintain the social order and they, you know, soberly declare that whatever
our many differences may be, if there's one thing that we can all agree on, it's that violence should
never ever ever be used by anyone for any reason ever anywhere, right? Same thing in both cases,
we're being shown the violence that we're all subjugated to that determines the nature of
the world we live in, but it's not enough to just submit to that violence, the ultimate
act of the ultimate expression of power is for us to say that we don't even have access to our own
perceptions and our own reasoning and that we don't even see the violence that we're being
subjected, like, subjugated by. Okay, so Constantine found Christ just like today's
multinational corporations and governments have found the philosophy of non-violence and
anti-oppression identity politics and all the rest, and here we are. And so understanding what
the sort of narrowing paths, the intensifying feedback loop between social role specialization
and the narrowing of the range of biological potentials that are elicited by the developmental
experiences that we have in the kinds of societies we now inhabit and, you know, understanding
the relationship between that and like the conceivable trajectories that we could go on,
of course, has something to do with asking a question about how we can enhance plasticity,
or how we can access modes of experience, perception and behavior that an increasing
number of people are, you know, finding increasingly inaccessible in, you know,
in more generally, I guess, how it's not just, you know, a question of how we can find any particular
realm of experience and behavior that we seem to be losing, but how we can really just
access the potential to switch between modes, how we can develop greater sort of plasticity
in general. So answering that, you know, the real answer to that question that I have to offer
is that I'll know when I finish writing Revolutionary Biology, because that's
what the last part of the book is about. But, you know, of course, there's a ton of research
about this very question, and it's not like I've read none of it. But understanding the
problem in neurophysiological and in biological terms, some kind or another, I think is totally
crucial for really focusing on, you know, for conducting the kinds of research that are only
going to be possible to conduct in the real world, right, in the context of actual social
relationships and political efforts and things like that. That's a core premise of the World Tree
Center is that there's certain, there's certain questions about, you know, the nature of individual
variation and whatnot that only become apparent in certain contexts. You see certain kinds of
individual variation when you're locked up in prison and certain other kinds of individual
variation when you're climbing the corporate ladder or when you're a street kid or whatever,
and you see certain, you know, certain realms of human behavior and perception and therefore
individual variation therein in the course of doing politics of contending for power.
And so there's certain questions that can only be, you know, that only emerge
in outside of the academy, doing things to try to affect the world. So there's a need for a
different kind of science for that reason, but also because answering those questions,
as much as they do need to be informed by, you know, the kind of research that can happen
within academic institutions, there's also certain ways to try to answer those questions
that can only be done outside of that context in real world, you know, attempts to create specific
kinds of cultures, develop certain kinds of relationships, affect certain perceptual shifts
in people, attain certain forms of power, right. And so we can, we can kind of conceive of life
and political struggle and attempts to survive and all the rest as research in a way.
But even sort of beginning with like conducting that program of research in a way that's coherent
at all, tuning to the right variables and making the right choices about what, you know, what a
meaningful inquiry would even look like, I think does require us to define the realities we're
experiencing in as sort of rigorous of biological terms as possible. And so in this particular
regard, I think the, obviously there's a feedback between the stories we tell, like the
narratives that we construct, the reasoning processes we undergo, and our sort of like
baseline physiology, the particular embodied states that we're inhabiting, which, you know,
in turn are responsive to the environment that we're inhabiting to the social realities and
realities of power. So it goes both ways. These stories that we tell, like, it's, it's not,
it's not losing when you lose. It's, it's not dying when you die. It's actually transcending and
winning. You know, these come from the embodied experience of being subjugated by systems of
power. But then likewise, the stories that come out of these embodied states feed back onto
the embodied states that produce them, you know, there's these self-reinforcing feedback
loops. And so what, you know, what are these sort of like neurophysiological
conditions that characterize a sense of defeat, a total loss of agency, either with respect
to direct physical aggression, or just more generally to like determining the terms of
one's existence? There is like pretty good interspecies, you know, cross-species research
on a fairly sort of like unified biology of defeat. Oh, and I guess I do have to mention
real quick that I'm right now touching on exactly what Jordan Peterson touched on
fairly early on in his career, that so many people responded to, you know,
emphasized as if it illustrated how completely ridiculous everything he said was.
And I found that whole, if you don't know who Jordan Peterson is or what I'm talking about,
I'm sorry, we'll get through this quick. You know, in his case, I think it was something
about arthropods and I think they're serotonin systems. And he was giving one example of
precisely this type of biology I'm describing. And it was a bummer, he is wrong about so many
things. But he wasn't wrong about this and the fact that people chose to focus on it and use it
to illustrate ostensibly the complete absurdity of everything he said is, I think, a perfect
example of how the unwillingness of people, you know, like the left, whatever that is,
to engage with certain realms of science in a meaningful way is just an utter catastrophe
how so many people could see the the inviability of the arguments that people were making
against him. And then it's a pretty short leap for a lot of people towards assuming
that if the way people are rejecting what he's saying is so wrought with very intuitively
apparent errors that what he's saying must be true. And the people who are disputing it are
just motivated by crazy ideology or whatever. But so anyway, there is in fact a biology
of defeat and involves myriad, you know, whole panoply of interrelated stress hormones and
neurotransmitters and patterns of physiology and the whole thing. But I'm not going to try to
do it justice in this episode because it would just be too long. But I would just like mention
a few, I think, particularly interesting aspects of it. One is that in certain species, there have
been these, you know, different like feedback loops have been observed. So for instance,
some species of salmon, I think Atlantic salmon is what it's been documented in,
have dominance hierarchies that are pretty like strongly correlated with size.
And so a hasty observation of that state of affairs would probably lead one to conclude
that the larger animals, you know, are just the ones who end up dominating the smaller animals.
But it's actually not that the the arrow of causation actually points in the other direction.
The animals that gain dominance become bigger than their subordinate counterparts,
which of course reinforces their capacity to dominate. But so, you know, I think that's a
good illustration. The reason I bring up that particular that particular phenomenon is because
I think, you know, it's a it's a good illustration when the effects of dominance or support,
you know, social subordination manifest in such an extreme way at the level of gross
anatomy. It's probably pretty easy to imagine that at the level of brain activity, and, you know,
the HPA axis and stuff like that, there's probably some pretty significant shifts that are happening
just based on what what you've experienced and what what kind of society you're living in
and what your role in it is. One particularly interesting paper I found about this was published
in Brain Behavior and Evolution in 2007. And while they're describing the results of their
own work in rainbow trout in the course of the paper and elaborating on their thesis,
they, you know, cited a bunch of interesting research in other species. And so the results
they're describing here pertain to African cichlid fishes. But, you know, the there really is like
all vertebrates have the same systems of neurotransmitters and, you know, the same I mean,
even an extreme example would be a number of invertebrates like octopuses are separated from
humans by the, you know, 550 million years of evolution or something like that. Our common
ancestor didn't even really have anything you would reasonably describe as a brain, but dopamine
is involved in, you know, we both rely on the neurotransmitter dopamine. And so even though
our large brains evolved separately, there's individual variation in octopuses that is
very much like individual variation in humans and other vertebrates with respect to like approach
avoid behavior and risk reward calculations and, you know, exploration and boldness and all that
because dopamine does a very similar thing. And so, you know, here it's like we're talking
about vertebrates, which are all much more closely related. And so the, the neurochemicals
that are involved in the systems that are involved in what I'm calling the biology of
defeat are, you know, in particular, like stress hormones like cortisol and serotonin and the
HPA axis, which serotonin heavily interacts with to one of the reasons that the so-called
domestication syndrome does what it does is that changes in serotonin regimes influences changes in
the HPA axis. In fish is the HPA axis is the HPI axis. Instead of adrenal, it's inter-renal,
but it's the same, you know, it's a gland right by the kidneys that releases a hormone that
does something very similar. So anyway, they're saying of cichlids in particular, but we really
can extend these findings to other species. These results suggest that fish losing fights for
social dominance, but not experiencing the loss as a chronic stressor, will have a strong drive
to reestablish their position within a habitat or hierarchy. In nature, fish that have
experienced defeat will seldom find themselves confined with the dominant fish, but rather seek
out a new territory. Therefore, most encounters with conspecific individuals, individuals of the
same species, will be brief. Moreover, it is important that losing fish maintain or even
increase their effort in the next competitive challenge for resources. So this of course
is illustrating a very crucial distinction between the realities we experience now and
what a whole lot of species in a whole lot of different contexts over the course of a whole
lot of evolution have experienced, which is that fighting somebody and losing means that you
want to leave. And that establishes like a very different biological regime than just sticking
around and experiencing this chronic state of subordination. And so this really shows how
under a certain set of conditions, we could get sort of frozen in a particular moment,
in a particular phase of our experience, you know, the experience of the subordination, the
biological reality that kicks in is one that tells us like, okay, this is a bad situation,
and it's time to cease this fight and kind of get out of here. And then one can recover their
sense of self and its neurophysiological correlates that, you know, say, all right,
now it's time to contend for myself again at some, you know, point in the future.
But yeah, you can see how the mass societies that we inhabit don't allow for us to ever get
away from the power that we're subjected to. And that fundamentally changes us the experience of
chronic subordination turns us into a new kind of person and some real meaningful respect,
who just can't imagine what it would be like, not just to think you might be able to win a
fight, but to even know what it would feel like to consider fighting as an option to even be able
to evaluate it. You so often hear people in this society make these categorical declarations that
it would be impossible to contend for power via force against the current dominance structure,
because they're just so, you know, because they're so overwhelming, they have such an
overwhelmingly greater capacity for force. And this is just not true. It's something people
assert with such confidence as if it's just so patently obvious that is not real. You know,
at any time anybody's been involved in a conflict with the police that gets kind of serious,
that reality becomes really apparent that there's just like there's not enough police with enough
guns or whatever to engage in some kind of successful conflict with like a huge proportion of the
population of a given city or whatever. That's just absolutely not real. And as I think I've
said on this podcast before, I mean, the fact that the US military has suffered, you know,
at this point, like half a century's worth of pretty crushing defeats, honestly. I mean, they've
proved that they can they can take any capital and put up a flag in it, right? But in terms of
their ability to actually maintain, you know, I mean, they like, I mean, come on now, right?
Like, if significantly more impoverished and smaller populations can do it, it's just very
hard to make any kind of purely material argument that the, you know, the population of the United
States couldn't defeat the United States military and the police forces, the various police forces
that are employed within American borders. And, you know, I mean, whatever, I'm not
arguing for any particular political strategy involving any particular kind of aggression.
I'm pointing out the profound perceptual, like perceptual shift, the way that reality is
experienced differently by people who are subject to chronic subordination,
so that they just like I said, don't have access to even a part of themselves that would make a
calculation about this kind of, about this kind of thing. And so, you know, if we ask of what
does this sort of biology of chronic as opposed to acute subordination consist? Well, one of the
factors is definitely cortisol. So, this paper talks about how a 1999 study quote showed that
plasma cortisol was initially elevated in both fish involved in a dyadic fight for social dominance.
When the dominant subordinate relationship was decided, plasma cortisol decreased in dominant
fish, whereas it continued to increase in subordinate fish. Several studies on different fish species
have shown that subordinates display higher cortisol levels than dominance and cortisol levels seem to
stay elevated as long as the subordinate status is maintained. And so, what they describe in a
number of different ways, they show that long term elevation, say like 48 hours or so of cortisol
decreases locomotor activity and aggression, but that short term elevation of plasma cortisol, say like
an hour or so, increases locomotor activity, right? And so that the effects of cortisol,
of stress hormones are contingent on the duration and that they seem to engender
these bursts of heightened activity if there's an actual burst of cortisol, a relatively short,
intense elevation of cortisol levels, but that if you're just chronically inundated with the
stuff, there's a fundamental unresponsiveness to the environment in general that begins to occur,
as well as a diminishment in the capacity for aggression. So of course, here we can think
of the world we inhabit, not just in terms of the actual, you know, the chronic threat display,
aggressive threat display of all, you know, because all dominant hierarchies in any animal
are maintained by some, you know, actual aggression, but then a whole, whole, whole lot of symbolic
aggression of threat displays derived from the language, you know, from the vocabulary of
aggressive movements and behaviors, you know, they take on these stereotype forms that are
used for their purely communicative value. And then there's often a sort of like subordinate
behavioral response. So a dominant submissive interaction can occur without there being any
actual aggression. And so our, you know, our cortisol regimes are determined not only by
the actual sort of chronic, aggressive displays that were subjected to in the form of, you
know, men with guns, wandering the streets, looking for people doing things that they don't
like to put them in a cage. But, you know, but just everything else that is always happening
in our lives, that, you know, like the fact that the rent goes up while our paychecks stay
the same and just all of the other things, these, you know, the way that we have shifted
from regimes of experience where we could expect to need huge bursts of just like monumental,
heroic agency where we could, you know, fight with really big animals or fight with other people
or run away from whatever, you know, into where we have transitioned into these
regimes of experience where we're just kind of chronically inundated with the knowledge that
there's like 100 emails that we really, really need to check. I don't mean that me personally.
I don't want to dissuade anybody from writing to me. I like my email, but you know what I mean,
you know, the debts that we can't pay the student loans and the, you know, just like the fact that
we ended up in this weird Craigslist roommate situation with these people who just like whatever,
right? Just all of that stuff is having this huge, huge effect on the biology of agency versus
defeat. And then there's a serotonin component to all of this. Serotonin very significantly
mediates the activity of the HPA axis. And so one interesting thing that I'll just note real
quickly, because it's a society of people on selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors,
is that in other species doling out the SSRIs has been, you know, pretty strongly correlated with
loss of dominant status and with, you know, social subordination. And of course, the serotonergic
changes are that characterized domestic animals are a really big part of what enables them to
live under these conditions that we've placed them in that, you know, where they've become
essentially solely instruments of somebody else's narrowly defined, you know, human certain humans
narrowly defined self interest completely at the expense of anything that you might call an
assertion of their own interests. And, you know, get let off to slaughter and all that stuff. So,
you know, that's kind of an interesting parallel. Again, as I guess this episode is coming out
before the next biological singularity episode, but as I'll talk about in that episode, there's
always something to keep in mind discussing these kinds of biology where very similar
biological or social or ecological realities, well, or, you know, the same, you know, category
of biological reality or change can have very, very different manifestations or effects,
depending on these very acute configurations of variables. But, you know, it is so it's good
not to generalize too much and get into thinking things like, oh, like, you know,
serotonergic changes that allow people to not engage in like aggressive hostility with everybody
they meet are actually bad because they allow domestication to occur and for people to, you
know, allow a powerful few to subordinate and slaughter us all or whatever. But it is worth
understanding these parallels because that is one of the possibilities for those kinds of
serotonergic changes or, you know, for any kind of big category of biological change like that.
So, yeah, that is my account of the very particular feedback loop between
biology and the cultural narrative around the life of Jesus of Nazareth that prevails,
you know, that has prevailed for the last couple of millennia. I think it says something very profound
about how deeply wounded people were in the actual experience of being subjected to
political domination and indeed, you know, torture and execution and exile
in the Jewish national context in which Christianity kind of first emerged.
And it also says something very profound about the sense of powerlessness people experienced
witnessing their own sense of agency in relation to the scale of the empire they inhabited
that people adopted this depoliticized version of the story about the execution of a revolutionary
by the state in adopting Christianity. I think it says something very troubling and very intense
about the inner lives, the temperament, the embodied experience of people
that they were able to adopt a story that says, you know, the life of Jesus was never about winning,
it was always about losing and dying and being crucified because when you really think about it,
torture and execution is actually this form of victory, you know, it's a spiritual victory
because victory in the world is for people who are lost and thinking that the world matters,
but it doesn't and letting people hurt you is the ultimate form of transcendence and
the only way to truly win because the world is so evil and life is so intrinsically terrible anyway
that the only good thing that you can possibly do in this world is to be annihilated
and to eventually to know that eventually the whole world is going to be
annihilated or negated or whatever and those of us who have been chosen by embracing this truth
early on enough are going to rise up out of our graves and enter a transcendental realm where no
one can hurt us anymore because we've become a corporeal beings who live in the sky. I mean,
this is this is not a story told by people who are doing okay and we really have no idea
what's possible. We really don't have any sense of what degree of deviation from the current modes
of behavior and experience that people have been trapped in, I'm going to say,
at what scale, you know, what proportions of the population could deviate from these modes to
what extent. All we can do is try to understand the nature of these feedbacks as well and as
rigorously as possible and use that to inform different modes of inquiry and experimentation
into trying to exit the biology of defeat in particular and all of these other narrow ranges
of our potentials that we have been that we find ourselves confined to and see if there isn't some
other mode of being accessible to us that has a better chance of sustaining life on this planet.