Title: The Incompetent Authoritarianism of Vladimir Lenin
Episode #: 61
Episode ID: 12827604
Source: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/12827604-the-incompetent-authoritarianism-of-vladimir-lenin.mp3
------------------------------------------------------------

=== EPISODE METADATA ===
Generated: 2026-01-12 01:02:06
Episode ID: 13705927
MP3 File: 13705927-social-complexity-after-the-machines-interview-with-dr-shane-simonsen.mp3
Title: Social Complexity after the Machines: Interview with Dr. Shane Simonsen
Podcast/Artist: World Tree Center for Transformative Politics and Global Survival
Album/Series: Fight Like An Animal
Source URL: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/13705927-social-complexity-after-the-machines-interview-with-dr-shane-simonsen.mp3
========================
What is the highest technique you hope to achieve?
You have no technique.
Very good.
What are your thoughts when facing the opponent?
They don't play.
They don't play.
Greetings, friends.
I'm Arnold Schroeder, and this is Fight Like an Animal.
In this episode, I'm interviewing Dr. Shane Simonson,
and while I will let the interview largely speak for itself,
I just wanted to mention at the outset
that this is part of a broader effort of mine.
Well, Dr. Simonson's and I's perspective overlaps
in a large number of regards.
We have quite a bit to talk about,
and I imagine this will not be the only time
that we do talk on this podcast.
But in particular, I wanted to note that
it accords well with this broader effort I'm making
to try to direct some of the energy
and attention of this podcast
towards questions of future human ecologies.
And my strong sense that for as much as most visions
of the furtherance of social complexity
are built on utter fantasies
about sustainable forms of resource extraction
that simply do not exist,
I really do see domains
in like entirely different regimes of human interaction
with the broader global system of which we are apart.
Just truly novel future human ecologies,
subsistence modes and whatnot
that are neither a return to what has already come before
nor are they, you know, pretending
that you can keep tearing finite resources out of the earth
and burning fossil fuels and all the rest
and it will just somehow sort of work out
once some will wander another is finally waved
in the right general direction.
And a lot of that vision comes from my conception
about the potential futures
for essentially the co-evolution of our species
with others to form these sort of like complex ecologies
and subsistence modes that have never existed before.
And so the fiction episode,
the sort of like new Patreon fiction series
that I've been, that I released the first episode
of the Vivamancer series
is one effort in this one instance of this broader effort.
This interview constitutes another
and there will be some episodes of fight like an animal
pretty soon that will kind of continue that work
sort of talking about some of the developments
of whatever you want to call it,
technology or the co-evolution of humans
into a multi-species complex
with novel forms of biology or whatever
that are the foundation of the Vivamancer series
in more concrete scientific detail
based in the research that exists in the here and now.
There's also being a significant aspect
of what the World Tree Center
for Transformative Politics and Global Survival
is directing some of its attention to.
So anyway, like I said,
I thought I would let the interview speak for itself
so here it very well is.
Okay, I'm Arnold Schroeder
and I am here with Dr. Shane Simonson
of the, it's called the Zero Input Agriculture blog,
is that correct?
Yes, that's my mind blog.
And also the author of,
what is the series of novellas you wrote called Altogether?
The series is called Our Vitreous Womb.
Our Vitreous Womb, right, right, right.
Okay, so I'm here with Dr. Shane Simonson
of the Zero Input Agriculture blog
and the Our Vitreous Womb series of novellas,
both of which in some way are, you know,
converging projects in very significant regards.
One is very concretely in the here and now
Dr. Simonson doing agricultural experiments,
living on a farm and trying to contemplate ways
to develop useful means of navigating the inevitable cessation
of the current mode of life we're engaged in.
And the series of novellas takes place,
it's 30,000 years into the future, is that correct?
It will take a little bit, yeah.
Yeah.
Nobody's counting anymore.
Yeah, in which nobody has any conception whatsoever
of this phase of history,
at least nobody who is centrally involved
in any of the central characters.
And it's a world that has taken one conceivable path.
And so before we talk about those projects
in any kind of real substantial detail,
could you just tell us, you know,
where it is, what path it was you took
to get where you are now?
Your life career, that kind of thing.
Yeah, so I grew up in subtropical Australia
on the edge of suburbia,
so I grew up as a biology loving kind of nerd of a kid.
Anything I could grow, any animal I could catch,
I'd like drag it home and stick it in a tank
and look at it until I let it go or the poor thing died.
So I went through an academic track
leading into biochemistry
and very quickly realized that
professional research science is kind of,
I don't know, stagnant dead in the water.
I always got in trouble for like asking questions
and like using terms of phrase in my papers
that were just, you know,
oh no, you can't do that.
And I became more and more aware
about the possibility of the collapse
of industrial civilization
and that it was probably underway around me
if I actually paid attention.
So I pulled the plug on that career
and I moved back to the subtropics
and bit by bit ended up retiring early
in my early 40s onto a big chunk of land.
So I'm now an experimental farmer
trying to develop locally adapted crops
for this region that can function without industrial inputs.
And that's something that's never been done.
Well, I say never, never.
The indigenous people that came before us
did a pretty good job of living on this continent.
The first hundred years of Europeans in Australia,
we couldn't feed ourselves.
We were a net food importer.
And it's funny, you compare yourselves
to other parts of the world.
We went from hunter-gatherer
to industrial agriculture with nothing in between.
We pretty much just went straight into mechanized agriculture.
So we've got nothing to fall back on.
So I'm basically trying to figure out a way forward
to fill in that gap if and when
we ever actually need to.
Okay, right.
So that makes me think of something.
That makes me think of a few questions.
But just real quick,
before we progress into anything else,
what exactly were you trying to do in your research career?
Like what was the focus?
Originally I was planning on doing pure botany
because I love plants the most.
But I steered into biochemistry
and organic chemistry because it's more employable.
But basically I saw in first year organic chemistry,
everyone was screaming and running the other way.
And I was like, this is kind of cool.
And that's always been a really good instinct in my life
to kind of run in the opposite direction to the crowd
because you end up being the one person
who can do something when no one else bothered to pick it up.
And I worked in natural product chemistry for a while
and then plant peptide chemistry.
Okay.
So yeah, lots of, I don't know,
curing cancer, feeding the world.
That's just what you write on repeat on the grants
that you would send off to the funding bodies.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I mean, it's so astonishing to me how much,
you know, I've done a number of episodes
about the nature of academic institutions
and how they kind of constrain,
how there's all these people who show up into graduate programs,
wide-eyed and full of just tremendous passion
to understand the world
and to have some kind of beneficial impact on it.
And how even just grad school,
like not even when they get into their soul-crushing careers,
I mean, people get messed up from it.
And so I get these heartfelt emails from people
who are like, thank you so much for what you said about that.
Like I felt like I was in a cult and it totally, you know,
and it's so...
So that's one of my target demographics
is people who kind of have a passion for science
in a broad, like as it's broadly defined,
like the kind of science you're doing now
where you're actually applying yourself
in some meaningful way to a real problem, you know,
but who are really alienated from this other thing
that is so many people's experience of institutional science.
And so that's cool.
So that's very cool.
I consider fight like an animal
to be part of the sort of like diffuse kind of parallel academy
that we're all trying to figure out how to build.
And it's truly really important that people do that.
So I'm curious about the ecological conditions.
I don't know subtropical Australia very well at all.
Can you give me a sense of like what kind of native vegetation is there?
Like what kind of percentage of the land is covered by vegetation,
the amount of precipitation you get?
So I'll start with climate.
So if you look at the climate averages of our area,
it looks like one of the most amazing places in the world
to grow things.
But the problem is Australia has a really, really variable climate.
We're stuck between two moody oceans
that constantly change their mind about whether they're like hot and wet
or hot and dry or cooler and wet.
So we go through the biggest one is the 10 year cycle
from El Nino to La Nina.
So at the dry extremes, we can have like nine months with zero rain.
One of those periods we got to 40 degrees on the first day of spring
and there was ash raining from the sky because there was fires all around us.
There were paralysis ticks just crawling everywhere.
It was, I don't know, I'm not officially diagnosed,
but I think I'm like psychopathic in my tendencies
if you want to slap a label on it.
Like I've always just been odd the way I approach things.
And I was just like, oh well, it's just another day in paradise.
At the other extreme where we get the really wet years,
last summer we had probably one of the wettest years in a century give or take
and we had a meter of rain fall over three days.
Yeah. And so this seems like, I guess maybe a way to phrase,
I've never thought of it before,
but a lot of regions that are bread basket regions of the world,
I guess are becoming more subtropical Australia like
because I keep talking about this where I hear people talk about estimating food
production, food output based on means of precipitation and temperature.
And I'm like, the mean isn't important.
It's whether one day it's really hot
and the next day it's snowing or whatever.
And we're starting to get a lot of that in places that have traditionally
California Central Valley is one of the places that I've,
you know, typically made my home some of the time.
And you're seeing it even there where, you know, on any scale,
you choose whether it's seasonal or literally between two days,
there's sharper temperature fluctuations.
And that's really something that I'm sensing institutions and academia
is not really grasping in the same way that people who just grow food
seem to be understanding.
Right. And it's really one of those things that's going to require
like an embodied knowledge,
like a practice where you're working the ground to get any sort of real
handle on how to deal with that stuff.
Okay.
The emergence of grain based civilization independently,
almost simultaneously around the world was probably due to the climate
globally settling into a more stable pattern year to year.
Exactly.
Because if you're going to do all of the work to like prepare the
land and plant the crop, you have to be able to be,
to depend that you're going to get enough from that to live.
And I've done some rough research into this before industrialization
about once every five years, the crops would fail and you'd kind of
squeak by with the reserves and the granary.
About once every generation, about every 25 years,
you'd have two crop failures in a row and then you'd have a proper famine.
Yeah.
And that's basically what cut the elderly and the children out of
the population for that period of crisis.
But the young, the prime age working people would come out the
other side of that and things would continue.
That dynamic has been broken down by industrialization,
particularly the ability to move bulk commodity food over
long distances.
That's something that used to happen over water.
So you'd get regional ports and river cities that would reach
reasonable size, but land based transportation was
basically impossible.
You'd have villages five kilometers away from each other.
One would have abundant grain and the other one would be starving.
And it was energetically in inefficient to transport the grain
from one to the other by Oxford.
There's a limit to how much you can move heavy commodities around.
Right.
Yeah, I've always assumed, I mean, there's quite a few complexities,
but so much of the time agriculture is written about as if its
development is owing to some kind of like massive conceptual
revolution of some kind or another.
And I'm so skeptical.
I think that so much of it really does seem to be the sort of
like uniquely stable benevolent Holocene climate that we've been
in.
Humans probably really were just not that cognitively different,
you know, 50,000 years ago or whatever.
And yeah, even, I mean, really, even without all of the
alterations that we've undertaken, it's very likely that if we were
just on the sort of, you know, the Milankovitch cycle generated
kind of variability in the climate that we had been on for quite
a while, the period of this like unprecedented stability and
agricultural abundance would be coming kind of to an end.
And I'm curious what, so you get you get a lot of intense
variability there and what is like kind of the ecosystem?
Like are we talking about like forest cover?
Are we talking about?
Yeah.
So we're pretty close to the coast and about 100 meters up,
which is like elevated for Australia because it's so flat everywhere else.
Yeah, right.
Originally it was vine scrub, rainforest, a bit of the wetter
gum tree forest here.
All of that was cut down when the town was founded.
It was a timber town for like the first however many decades of its life
and when all of the trees, all the good trees were gone,
the mill shut down and it turned into a ghost town overnight.
It's now turning into like asteroid belt suburbia.
So when we're one of the few large blocks we and we've got smaller
suburban neighbors around us kind of hobby farm size,
but yeah, we've got 40 acres, which is enough to do.
Oh, wow.
Yeah, it's a decent chunk, but it's mostly hills.
So there's only a few acres of that that are flat enough to do cropping on.
Gotcha.
And so you do crops and then you what is your animal agriculture?
Is it goats primarily?
Yeah, the dairy goats are the main endeavor at the moment.
And I did have a large block of geese and I was doing hybridizing
work with those that got into a bit of a dead end.
I've given them up temporarily.
We've got dogs, but they're really just pets.
They don't do a lot of work.
But yeah, I find since it's just me,
I have to be careful to not take on too much complexity and diversity
because if I want to push particularly the projects that need hand
pollination to get them off the ground,
that needs a lot of regular time and attention to figure out
the rhythms of that particular species when I'm working on it.
And so then in terms of just trying to do zero input
or what are kind of like the most fundamental constraints?
What are you like most constrained by?
So the biggest surprise for people in Australia is that I don't irrigate.
And when I see most people's vegetable gardens with like drip lines
and sprinklers and stuff going through them,
I instantly think of somebody in a hospital bed with like drips
and oxygen tubes and all these things hooked up to them.
And the second the power is out, they're gone.
They're not a viable organism at that stage.
And with the fluctuations, I basically do it with timing.
So about half of the time in a typical year,
it's very easy to grow crops here without irrigation.
But I also do need to focus on selecting genetics of crops
that the root system actually likes the soil that we've got.
So the basic principle is rather than changing the conditions
to suit the plant that you think you'll need to grow,
you change the plant to suit the conditions that you already have.
So no water storage and redistribution system at all that you're using?
Only for household use and for the goats.
They have water that comes off the roof of their shed.
And I'm not trying to do everything.
Like I'm not trying to go back to the Stone Age in one generation
because this project has made me appreciate
how unbelievably skilled pre-industrial peasants
must have been the range of things they could do.
But also the functional communities,
because I think the specialized skills,
one person can't learn them all in a lifetime.
You actually need a community.
And the transmission of those skills is really critical as well.
Like that takes a lot of time and social complexity.
And we've lost all of it.
We're basically starting pretty much from scratch.
It's so common for me to talk to people who have some kind of,
you know, not necessarily as large a scale a project as you,
but a significant project that they devote a very substantial
proportion of their waking hours to who at some point confessed,
you know, I can't feed myself like I'd be dead tomorrow
if the lights went off kind of thing.
And so I'm wondering what, do you calculate kind of your,
do you have a rough sense of your net caloric output
from what you're doing right now?
Could you live off of it?
So again, it's seasonal when the goats are milking.
We've got more milk than we can drink.
So that's great.
They do still require supplementary salt and minerals.
So at least it's not calories and protein that they're giving.
In time, I could wean them off that.
Like the amount of salt and organism needs is something that
they can adapt physiologically to as well as genetically.
Like there's all these levels of adaptation.
And on top of that perennial like tree based photo tends to have
higher mineral content from the graphs.
So I'm re-establishing photo trees for them as well as I go.
Okay.
So that's an example.
So if I feel like a third of the year,
if I stomach drinking, you know, 80% of my calories through goat
yogurt, no worries.
I mean, I render the fact from the animals that I process as well.
That covers the rest of the year.
It stores really well with the staple crops that I grow.
And I do make a major emphasis on staple crops.
I think permaculture in particular has become very obsessed
with vegetables and fruits.
And it's bizarre.
Well, if you've only got a small space and you're growing
relatively intensively, the quality improvement on those versus
store board, it makes sense.
But you need the zone three and four and like the other zones
for it to be a full system.
And yeah, I'm sympathetic to people who are living in suburbia
and small places that they have to use their space to
make some effect.
But anyway, so with the staple crops I grow, I basically do a
time equivalent energy return on energy investment.
So I keep track of how many days I spend growing that crop
to completion.
And then I look at how many days worth of calories I get back
from it.
And I can usually get three to one or as high as a 10 to one
return on investment.
Oh, wow.
Okay.
Great.
Yeah.
And so the goats are foraging primarily just off of the
native vegetation.
You're supplementing with some, you're trying to reintroduce
some forage trees and stuff like that.
But they're mostly just eating what's, what would
intrinsically be there.
Is that the case?
Yeah.
That's the amazing thing about goats.
All these weedy species that I previously thought I had to
get rid of.
Now I actually, I shepherd and steward them.
It's like, oh, this horrible weedy tree that is like
declared noxious.
I'll cut it down because it's big enough, but I'll leave
enough leaves on over that can grow back for next time.
I actually think that food is a bit of an over.
It gets too much of a focus as well.
So even if I could grow all the maize that I wanted,
cooking it requires firewood.
Yeah.
So that's another factor.
So one acre of decent land, slightly crappy,
but decent for Australia land would probably be enough
to supply calories for a person.
But if you wanted wood for cooking and heating,
purifying water, construction, that's probably
five acres per person.
And this is the main reason why human population
bumped up against a ceiling of about half a billion
people for thousands of years until we hit industrialization.
And then it went practically vertical.
So yeah, probably some time in the next century to put it
broadly, we're going to be heading on a trajectory back
towards something like half a billion people.
Maybe a bit more.
I mean, there's probably going to be a tail end of
fossil fuel resources and technology.
And I'm not a fast collapse kind of person anymore.
I think a stair step series of simplifications that are
regionally focused is much more likely.
Yeah.
And that really brings me to an interesting point of
convergence in our thinking where I feel like there's
something deeply psychological here,
but there's also just a lot of like substantial science to
talk about where a lot of people who come to this
understanding that this way of life is very finite.
And a lot of us are going to see at least a significant
extent of its end in our own lifetimes feel like this seems
like they kind of have the sense of like,
Well, that's the end of the story.
Then I guess, and there's kind of nothing to do.
And I have such an opposite sense of us living in this
very, this very finite, but very potentially.
Productive phase where we know that we're going into
something else and we have some time to really think about
what we want to do with the resources and the
connectivity and the technology we still have access to
while we still do.
And one thing that you said in your blog that really
appealed to me was that some of that is a process of
trying to distill knowledge that currently exists in
far flung scientific papers and stuff like that and kind
of convert it into memorable myths.
I don't know, you know, but like stories like things
that can be transmitted.
And that that really that feels like so like part of
what you're doing is kind of that, right?
Like you're trying to synthesize knowledge that you
have from a scientific career and from your own
experimentation while you can still get on the Internet.
But produce sort of like really accessible packets of
knowledge.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
My dream and I'm still not quite sure how to do it would be
to cross Aesop's fables with the scientific revolution.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Right.
So it's like you have Aesop's fables are like in and of
themselves.
I've actually never read them, but there's there's a
number of them and they're really short and accessible
and all that.
Yeah.
Yeah.
In a way that hangs around.
I mean, it's probably I was thinking about this the other
day, the most influential writer in history.
And I would say it's probably Aesop.
And he didn't write.
He probably didn't write them.
It's probably a collection of distilled folk tales.
And I actually think these kind of stories.
They're not the kind of thing that one person can sit down
and force out of their brain.
They're the kind of thing that has to go through
generational selection.
Yeah.
And we've got the Internet.
So it's the kind of thing that could be done
effectively to like alpha beta A beta test,
you know, ways of getting a concept across.
Yeah.
I think that's beautiful.
And I'm, I, I kind of, I'm working in a similar vein
right now where I'm trying to take some of,
I've been producing a podcast for like three years now
where I apply no such constraints to myself.
Or I'm like, get a heap of scientific papers and
ramble as much as I want.
Right.
And now I'm going back through and I'm trying to
take key insights from that journey and turn them into
two minute YouTube videos.
You know, and it's the same kind of thing.
Like some of them aren't going to stick,
but hopefully some of them do.
And I'm working with a group.
So it's like there's, you know,
there can be some discussion about what's actually effective
and whatnot.
But yeah, that, that feels so crucial to me.
I feel this distinct sense of having accumulated a lot
of knowledge that I just can't concisely convey at the
moment.
They're really being this need to,
and so how does the,
how does the fiction fit into that scheme?
Hmm.
So you were talking about when people learn about the
likelihood of industrial civilizational collapse,
their common responses just to throw out their hands
because they're like,
well, if we're not getting Star Trek,
they'll be like however many years of Mad Max,
and then it's all over.
Maybe we'll go back to like Dungeons and Dragons.
If you're optimistic without the dragons,
because we ate them all.
And I'm like, are they our only choices?
Like it's just feels like such a poverty of imagination
to the thing.
Once we don't have Xbox and Walmart,
that's it.
It's like,
they're all the options exhausted.
So yeah,
but the common thing in the Doomer kind of circles is
we've used up all of the good resources for industrialization,
the high concentration or bodies for making metals
that are on the surface,
the concentrated fossil fuels,
all the magic ingredients, the foundation.
It's basically coal and steel where the things
that got it off the ground.
And then everything else is like a little tiny branch,
a little tiny tweak on the base of that truck.
Right.
So I looked around.
It's like, well,
what are the resources that could be the foundation
for a new civilization on the other side of the,
you'd say,
you'd say presumable dark age that's ahead of us.
When you really look at dark ages,
it's just people were too busy to sit around writing things down.
So we just kind of fill in the blanks with that worst.
You know, if there's,
if there's darkness outside,
you imagine there's a monster there, right?
It's just human nature.
And I think it's the same with history.
I'm sure there were horrible years in there,
but you could only suffer so much before you just dropped dead.
So, okay.
It's like perhaps just like how bad can it get?
Like just, just chill out a little bit.
Anyway, so getting back to the fiction.
I love biology.
And I'd like could a new civilization arise based purely
off biological technology.
And I thought about it.
The original agricultural revolution was a biotechnological
revolution.
So wheat, for example,
is a three-way hybrid between different wild grains.
They've reproduced it.
Like it only takes like 10 years and you can go for wild
grains to quite close to looking like modern wheat.
That happened probably by accident during a phase
of climatic chaos when all the sea levels were rising
because the distributions of plants and people got thrown
all over the place.
I actually think we've got like multi-generational
ecological PTSD as a people after going through that.
Like you look at a lot of the myths from,
they can be traced back to that time.
And I think we're still living through that.
Anyway, I'm getting off track.
I was getting off track.
Anyway, so the fiction is basically a thought experiment
in how could you build a complex dynamic society
where their main resource is biotechnology.
And when you think biotechnology, you normally think,
oh, there's going to be like these fancy labs
and supercomputers analyzing genomes.
They don't have any of that industrial base.
So much science fiction where it's basically mechanical
technology with a little bit of biology on top of it.
I haven't seen anyone do pure biological technology
before except a few examples where it's like alien biology.
And then you can just, it's just space magic tentacles.
So you can do whatever you like.
You do it.
Yeah, I tried to say, no, I want this to be plausible.
So basically everything is researched and put together
to think about how it could work.
So yeah, the people who've read it,
even ones who aren't particularly into science
and well-building were impressed that I did that very well.
Yeah.
And so I wonder because I'm obligated always in this podcast
to kind of inquire about the psychological foundations
of worldviews or something like that.
And I have a very similar, I'm very struck by the sense
in which we share this as a vision of like,
I possess no certainty about the future, right?
I'm very eager in conversations about it to be like,
I see a probability curve and I can assign like radically
different outcomes, a certain amount of space under that
probability curve.
And I'm well aware that I can't think of everything,
but one very conceivable future that, you know,
is taking up like kind of a significant amount of the,
you know, potential futures probability curve
in my imagination is a continuation of the trend
towards complexity and at least certain domains
of human life in our co-evolution with the global system.
And it's just not based on, yeah, it's not based on extracting
metal from under the ground or blowing the tops off mountains
to take the fucking coal out or any of this other crazy stuff
we're doing right now.
But I guess do you think that that maybe just comes from,
is that something that happens from an immersion in biology
combined with an acute awareness of an acceptance of collapse?
Like where, why do we see that where other people don't?
That's a really interesting question.
I would maybe, I like to use history as a kind of compass
through these kind of issues.
Yeah.
And when you look at the collapse of at least Western Rome,
the people living through it, like nobody wrote about it.
Like it was just, oh, the Barbarians have turned up again,
but they've already done that like five times in history.
So, you know, they'll go away again when we give them some,
some golden food and, you know, it'll go back to normal.
And there were, there was just a couple of historians at the time
saying, oh, wait a sec, like I've kind of put the pieces together
and this isn't looking good.
And I suspect that similar for most people alive today,
like we live in such a cognitively saturating information
ecosystem that recent events have proven how monopolized it is.
Like we like to believe that it's a, you know, anyone can say anything
kind of environment that we live in.
And that's very obviously not the truth.
I think it's more monopolized and manipulated than ever before.
And necessarily so, like I view culture and media like the hormones
of a multicellular organism that like keep all of the cells doing
what they need to do when they need to do it,
which includes often forgetting what was told yesterday entirely and denied it.
So, yeah, I don't resent people for that.
But like I said, on mindset, whatever I am,
I tend to exist on the margins of culture and society.
And I think like you go back to even hunter-gatherers
where you've always been there.
We're the shamans.
We're the scouts where you only want one of them in the village.
You wouldn't want, you know, 80% of the people to be like that
because it would just be chaos.
But yeah, so I think that's why we've been kept around.
Yeah, I really do often think about that from exactly that same
like comparative source of information where, you know,
you go back into like really, really traditional cultures
and find shamans aren't just deviating from cultural norms
in cases where it's like they're capable of something
or experiencing something that really causes a deviation.
But it's almost like they're just programmatically antagonistic
towards cultural norms.
And I'm kind of like, oh, God, am I sort of like that?
And I'm like, yeah, I think so.
And then I really see how that's totally necessary.
There always has to be one set of perceptions
that no matter what people are doing
takes a kind of default position of like, is this right?
I don't think so.
I think I'm going to look at other possibilities, right?
And if the group is doing something that's really great
and totally functional, then that's kind of useless.
But because of the way social cognition works,
if the group gets kind of stuck somewhere that it shouldn't be,
that deviant psychology, that group critical psychology
becomes really, really essential.
And so yeah, I guess right.
I guess we're in a time.
It also happens on larger scales though.
So I was looking at your past podcasts.
You were talking about a phenomenon
which I've seen labeled cultural schismogenesis.
Yes.
So groups of people, particularly when they're under stress,
tend to end up believing going one of two ways
on some core belief.
And then the groups will coalesce
and make themselves more distinct
to differentiate themselves against each other.
It's almost like a cultural immune system
or a cell division when it gets too big to function anymore.
And I suspect something like that is happening
in industrial civilization as it comes under more pressure.
I suspect it's a deep functional trait in humans.
So imagine you're in like a hunter-gatherer times
and the food starts running out.
And one group of people say,
oh, we're going to start eating this disgusting poisonous plant,
but everyone's avoided up to this point.
And some people in the group will like,
no, I refuse to do that.
And because of the habits required to feed on that plant,
you have to go to different places
and use different techniques and your taste change,
the group tends to split into two.
And you don't know the long-term consequences
of eating that new plant at a higher percentage of your diet.
You might find out that another generation,
all the kids have got birth defects or something.
And it's a way of hedging your bets basically
and A-B testing reality on a cultural level.
Yeah.
And so that was something I loved seeing in your blog
was your application of that frame of schismogenesis
to this time in the history of biology
when Lysenkoism was kind of really coming into prominence
in one political ideological sphere within Marxism or whatever.
And then something that isn't as definitively associated
with anybody's last name in particular
was happening as a reaction.
There was a process of schismogenesis occurring in science
where people were saying,
essentially either that organisms have such plasticity
that it's not even meaningful to think about trait heritability
or competition between individuals of the same species.
And then people over here on this other end
of the schismogenic continuum were like,
okay, each trait is like a complete world unto itself
in a ways like a rugged individualist
in a way that would make the John Birch Society proud.
And any given trait is reducible directly to a single gene
in the way that a wrinkled or a smooth pea is
in Mendel's famous.
He got lucky with these particular sets of traits
that actually do reduce to one gene,
but they just wanted to model everything like that.
And it's like the truth got very, very lost
in that process of cultural differentiation.
And that schism still is reverberating throughout biology
I think to this day,
but I guess I feel like collapse perceptions
are kind of the same where it's like,
you have the Prometheans and the Primitivists, right?
And those are kind of some version of that are the two camps.
There's people who are like, oh, I don't even worry about it.
Elon Musk is going to build us a shining tower in the sky.
And then there's these other people who are like, you know,
let's go huddle under a tarp and eat radioactive rat meat, you know?
And so you don't get this rich landscape of possibility
that I think really does exist.
But yeah, you have to kind of like,
you have to be capable of the synthesis.
You have to undergo the,
I think the very kind of intense psychological process
of acknowledging that things are going to come to an end.
If you survive, you might watch billions die.
You know, some really heavy things have to get processed.
But then when you do, you see this world of possibility open up
that is real as opposed to fake, you know,
but it's not just like, okay,
let's go fight the neighboring tribe for the last of the lentils.
And it's so, so let's,
so explain a little bit about the world you created in your fiction.
Like what was the particular scenario that you imagined
of this complex civilization roughly 30,000 years out in the future?
What path did they take?
A lot of it really reminded me of you social insects at times.
There's definitely some caste differentiation kind of stuff happening
and maybe some outright human speciation.
But yeah, tell us what it's all about.
Okay, so when, and again, history was kind of my example here.
So when you look back into human evolution,
often distinct stages from like Homo erectus to Neanderthal
like level to modern humans,
often there was a cognitive revolution that went along with it.
And particularly reduction in reactive aggression to strangers,
allowing the formation of larger groups.
And a similar parallel thing happens in social insects
as they go from being solitary to forming colonies
of like millions of individuals all working together.
So I imagined what would be the next step in that process
if it continues.
So the key adaptation in this next step for humanity
is a selection away from the instinctive fear
of one's own death.
So in this society, death is not viewed as anything to be worried about.
Basically, every individual when they become an adult,
which they do it at a relatively young age,
are given a bead that they wear around their neck.
This contains a completely painless, fatal poison
that at any time for any moment, they're free to eat it.
And they're done.
There are cultural structures where they are encouraged
to like say, yeah, you've reached the end of your useful lifespan
or this other person is better at doing the role
that you were in the running for.
And nobody feels afraid that that might happen to them.
Nobody feels guilty that they failed.
It's like just, you know, whoever's the best, that's fine.
They have that level of collective intent.
And when you harness that ability,
socially it allows things for eugenics,
selective breeding of humans to happen
that would be completely unacceptable today.
And this is a really important point.
I'm not expecting or encouraging people today
to go out and create these kind of societies.
I would actually argue that we're not cognitively capable
of doing it like the average human would be too.
It's like taking a zebra basically
and trying to turn them into a battery animal.
Their instincts and reflexes are fine tuned for an environment
that means that they would be completely dysfunctional
in a different set of circumstances.
And I can see that of all of the diversity of humans alive today,
there's like a distribution
in how instinctively afraid people are of death.
And if you took out, you know, the very extreme individuals
and started breeding them as a separate population,
they might be able to achieve that change relatively quickly.
I mean, the belly of foxes is a great example of that.
Totally.
Yeah, totally.
Yeah.
And I think that there's a kind of an open question
in the course of human evolution
that I started talking about a few years ago
and I finally found one paper that just came out a year or two ago
that addressed this directly,
this idea of like founder effects
of exactly that variety playing a really big role.
And you can even see a conjoined,
if somebody who is willing to perceive an environment
that other people don't want to go into
as a potentially suitable environment to navigate
and try to like find a means of subsistence in,
would also be the kind of person
who might possess less reactive aggression, you know,
like that lack of personal fear would tend to co-vary
with a lack of reactive aggression.
So if a few people fission away from the society
and say, let's go do something that strikes everybody else
as horrifying or, you know, as taboo or whatever it is,
you know, these like handful of weirdo deviants
go off and do their own thing,
then it's very, very likely that their descendants
are going to, you know,
that the distribution that previously existed
in their population of these traits of, you know,
individual fear of mortality,
of interpersonal reactive aggression,
you know, they're going to represent like one tail
of that distribution in the whole new population that results.
And so that's the idea, right?
Is that at some point people kind of like deliberately
started sequestering themselves in some way
or founded themselves environmentally sequestered
or who knows at this point?
Yeah, how that trait became dominant is part of the story
that gets revealed along the way.
So I won't give away the plot,
but yeah, it wasn't completely accidental.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
And so they're kind of,
it seems like there's some functionally differentiators.
So part of this kind of like really strong tendency
towards perceiving life on kind of like broader terms
than immediate individual self-interest.
One of its, one of its permutations is that
within a given sort of species,
there's kind of like caste differentiations
like we have in social instux.
Can you tell us a little bit about that?
Yeah, so the landscape is broken up into small territories
which are large enough to support
a reproductively viable group of individuals
and they are, I call themselves
like not the most creative name in the world,
but you have to be careful not to push language too far
all the time you lose people.
Anyway, so a cell goes through a life cycle.
So an empty cell is founded by new individuals
who compete for the right to like create a new tribe there
basically and the surrounding cells vote
on which of the contenders they actually want,
which speciality they think will suit their needs the most.
So there's limited trade between the cells,
but there's also strict quarantine.
So the biological material can move between the cells
but only under really carefully controlled circumstances.
So that makes things like epidemics
combined with the human diversity
that's emerged basically impossible.
Whereas now we just take, you know,
pretty much all the same kind of people and pack them
together into these huge conglomerations
and surprise, surprise, half of them drop dead periodically,
which is not great for a stable society.
Anyway, so that cell then recruits the founding members,
which allows you to do, you know,
select the very best of the best for the trade
that you're trying to accentuate.
They go through several generations of performing their function
and helping to support their neighbors by providing goods
and services.
And eventually they reach a point where they're like,
okay, our time is done.
We've sent off reproductive individuals
to found cells elsewhere.
And if we failed to do that within, you know, five generations,
we had our chance.
We weren't good enough.
Those individuals weren't good enough to impress someone else.
The average lifespan of individuals is reduced as well
to 20, 30 years, lower in some cast.
And the reason why is humans today need to,
need about 15 years of childhood,
then about 15 years to master complex technical skills
and then another 15 years to pass those skills
onto another generation.
So we kind of have to live this long to achieve the level
of technical proficiency that we have with mechanical devices
like external technology, exosomatosize technology.
But if you don't need to do that anymore,
as soon as you've reproduced,
you've done your job basically.
We don't rely on all the complicated techniques
to take a whole lifetime to figure out.
And then, so in addition to there having been a conscious
process of their own evolution,
their subsistence ecology is also based on some kind of,
some biotechnology that does not involve supercomputers
and culture, media that's in.
Yeah.
So he tells a little about that.
So they basically do human accelerated
random genetic transfer.
So horizontal gene transfer is happening all the time
in nature, mostly through viruses,
but parasites and bacteria and there's one other route.
Yeah, they're the main way.
So particularly viruses do a lot of the shuffling
of just small bits of random DNA between organisms.
And that can have really profound effects.
So for example, the evolution of mammals has been traced back
to a viral protein that allows the uterus to function.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So basically they do this on a massive scale.
So especially individuals that are towards the end of their
reproductive cycle, they do more and more of this random
transgenesis.
So particularly sperm cells will take up naked DNA from
the environment with something as simple as a buffer
wash.
This has actually been done by researchers in I think
was the first paper who showed how to do it.
And if you are producing surplus offspring and you are
happy to just look for any interesting traits and see if
they're useful.
And if you have like horrible, you know, monsters born that
obviously aren't viable or if they're having a bad childhood,
calling is not an issue in the society at any stage.
So, and again, it's something that for a reader today
would see as horrifying.
But if you really think about it, the society has no disease,
no war, no hunger, no homeless.
It's a utopia, but at a cost.
So you have to decide basically how much do you value the
various freedoms that we currently believe are really
important to us.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And so I don't totally have a sense of what of these
processes of like what kind of low tech biotech you're
actually doing on your farm, but you're doing some, right?
Are you are you doing gene transfer like horizontal gene
transfer stuff in plants?
I'm mostly following the example of Luther Burbank, a
U.S. self-taught, I guess he called him a scientist
because the stuff he did was just extraordinary.
So in the 1800s, he was just a nobody who from a young
age started hand pollinating plants.
Okay.
And he didn't, he was advantaged by not being
learned at the time because he just crossed everything
with everything.
And he was getting seeds and hybrids of things that even
professional biologists today, you'd say, can I cross this
and that?
They'd be like, oh, no, the different genera don't even
bother.
He's already done it like a hundred years ago and nobody
knows about it.
So, and remember I said about wheat being a random
hybrid of wild species.
Yeah.
So I'm a big believer that hybridization is actually
a major driver of speciation events.
Most of the time when you've got a limited population, you
have kind of refining selection that's pushing them
towards one narrow ecological niche.
But periodically you get wide out crossing between
different species, different genera, sometimes even
different orders and family, like there's some really
wild, crazy stuff out there.
The wider it is, the less likely it is to happen.
So it's more of a bit of a miracle when it does.
But from that first generation hybrid population,
that you've got like species squared crammed into that
form factor, it can then specialize into all sorts of
different directions.
And if you look at the history of human crops, pretty much
all of them have hybrid origins.
And I mean, that's happened within our lifetime.
So around me there's four wild macadamia nut species.
And about a hundred years ago, some random plant
collector got two of them growing side by side
each other in his garden because he thought they
were interesting.
And they occasionally get like one nut off them
that you'd have to break the hammer trying to get it
open.
And from those original hybrids, we now have a
multi-million dollar industry.
And that happened within one person's lifetime.
Same thing happened to blueberries in the US
until recently they were all wild harvested stands.
And there was one woman, I think, in one village
decided to start figuring out how to make them
better.
So you hand Paul in it.
I mean, I think I can imagine it.
But will you just describe that real quick?
What do you actually do?
So some species like to outcross.
And it's just as simple as gathering genetic diversity
of different strains and putting them together
and they'll do the rest.
Oh, OK.
Other plants have more specialized pollination.
So they'll either self-pollinate before you get a chance
if you just leave them do it themselves.
So it's really just finding a way to stop the
pollen of the same species getting onto itself
which can involve just bagging flowers and removing
anthers before they shed their pollen.
Getting your timing right to get pollen from the
other species and applying it.
And often I literally do it by hand.
Like I don't even need tweezers for a lot of species
I work with.
So you just like rub your fingers onto.
Yeah, I'm going around with like my hand covered
with different dots of pollen from different plants.
That's great.
Yeah.
And if you did that for thousands of years,
the plants would actually evolve to be easier
to pollinate without any tools.
Right.
Of course.
Yeah.
So one thing that I loved in the,
in that fiction is these people,
you know, they don't necessarily have the same
vocabulary of biology that we do.
They don't necessarily know all the like
microbiological dynamics that we're aware of.
But there's,
they're hanging out doing these like very sophisticated
genetic engineering experiments that are at the
cutting edge of what we can now because again,
like, like we were talking about the beginning,
there's been some means of cultural transmission
that doesn't require somebody to read
Campbell's biology in community college
and then go stare at a microscope for,
and yeah, I have been,
I think that this is like this really interesting
thing that's happening right now that I'm starting
to become aware of in some of the synth
bio literature I'm reading where I'm,
my mind is blown by some of the,
the simplicity of some of the techniques that are
developing to get, you know,
like one of the realms of that whole world is just,
it's like the organism could be a yeast or a bacteria
or algae, but you're just trying to get something to
take a trans gene and in like hyper express
some protein or another that you're really
interested in, right?
You're just using the,
the organism is just something that's really simple
to cultivate and you're just trying to get some
product out of it that it wouldn't normally
be expressed.
And so I've been reading these papers about how
people are like tossing genes at,
you know, say like algal nuclei or even the,
is it chloroplasts and algae, whatever the other.
Yeah.
And in some of it is astonishingly straightforward.
Like you wouldn't need a lab and a centrifuge even.
I mean, you almost don't need anything.
And then the one that really blew my mind,
I need to reread it to make sure
that I'm not missing anything.
But I think human induced pluripotent stem cells,
somebody mastered a technique for generating those in like
2012.
But I just read a paper where you can turn a human cell
into a stem cell capable of differentiating into anything
with like this really straightforward.
I mean, it's all,
it just sounds like you're in like organic chem in college.
It's like, you know,
take like a 0.5 molar flask of whatever,
pour it on or whatever.
I mean, it's, and it's just like a few steps.
It's totally mind blowing.
But yeah, that I'm really enthusiastic about the possibilities
of the tail end of industrial genetic engineering.
I think it's going to do some really odd things,
but I also think it's extremely limited.
So again, it goes down to that paradigm of this section
of DNA, which is like, you know,
only a tiny fraction of the genome codes for this protein
that does this one thing.
And if we move it from organism to A to B,
then that function, which is based on one protein,
goes along with it.
So you can move one gene for like, you know,
millions of dollars.
I can move thousands of genes in an afternoon on my finger.
And my feeling is that biology is irreducibly complex.
So we've applied a lens to it that worked relatively well
for physics and chemistry.
And we've pulled out some details and principles.
But the more we look,
we just keep finding more and more systems that are all
like interwoven and tangled in chaotic.
And we're probably never going to get to the stage where we can
say, oh, I want an organism that looks like this and does that.
Oh, here's what the genome is to do that.
It's always going to be trial and error because it's just,
it's nonlinear.
It's chaotic.
It's messy.
And there's so many levels to it that I mean, good luck.
Well, and especially it also seems like there's a little bit
of just like this conceptual lens that's always like one
gene, one trait, you know,
and like where that actually turns out to be true.
There's a lot of potential, but where it doesn't,
there's this real like in, in the literature I just was
reading the other day on engineering algae to produce
various proteins.
It was, it was really like they could do it where there was
a fortuitous type of gene.
But in so many cases,
the expression at anything like a satisfactory level of that
gene was so intimately bound up in a, you know,
in a gene expression network that the algae wasn't,
you know, that the algae didn't generate that.
And they, they really just,
it's not just that they haven't figured that part out,
but you can really see how they aren't thinking about it,
how the end of the paper is like, yeah.
And in some cases,
we can only get a protein to express like a tiny fraction
of what it did in the original organism,
probably has something to do with epigenetics or something,
you know, like a big kind of hand wave maneuver at the very end.
And I'm like, yeah,
it probably does have something to do with epigenetics or something,
you know.
So this is a really great example of, you know,
the old saying about looking under the street lamp,
feel lost keys.
Exactly.
The last generation has had this absolute avalanche of
bioinformatic information like ATGC up the wazoo.
So of course we're looking at that because it's all we've got,
but there's other things that, you know,
the groups that are doing the hard work of like not just buying a kit
and like sequencing more DNA to throw on the pile.
So a really good example of this is a group studied the
structure of yeast chromosomes when they're unconvinced,
when they're actually like transcribing and active.
Right.
And the chromosomes form a complex,
precise three-dimensional structure.
Yes.
So we have no idea what the hell it is.
Like it took them like years to measure this one nucleus
and what they've found is that genes that regulate each other,
that are on separate, separate chromosomes end up being arranged
close to each other so that they can cross talk.
And you can have as many genome sequences as you like,
but if you don't also have that 3D structure and understand its
dynamics, where are you going to put the gene that you want
to put into that organism?
It's a crap shot.
So just put it on a gold pellet and fire it in there
and cross your fingers.
Exactly.
And that kind of stuff, I just, I don't know,
we don't even really have the foundations of a technology
at this point that would allow us to manipulate the
three-dimensional structure of DNA or in any other sense,
like to really manipulate the gene expression paradigm
of an organism as opposed to tossing genes back and forth
between genomes.
And so to me, there's very,
that's where the real constraints are.
I'm a firm believer.
I think some amazing things are coming out of this field
right now.
And I'm avidly reading the literature,
but it is yet another tragic case study.
And these kind of like, these weird paradigms that get
established within scientific disciplines.
And you don't know what would be possible if people could
just kind of escape their fucking frames, you know.
Well, it's part of the problem with modern bureaucratic
research science.
When you want funding, you have to apply saying,
I am going to do this.
This is the model.
This is the theory.
Here are the milestones.
I made a graph.
There you go, bureaucrats.
Give me my money.
And then you have to report back in four years' time and say,
yes, I did all of these things that I said I would.
And it's like, what's the point of doing it
if you know that it's going to work?
And the ability to like take long shot chances
and just do wild and crazy things
and like follow up on weird observations,
that's pretty much gone from modern science.
And that's where all of the innovations happened
in the pre-World War generation.
And yeah, it's one of the reasons why science is stagnating.
But then, so I think that another thing that your blog
pointed out that I am in firm agreement with
and that a lot of my work right now
is kind of being done in anticipation of
is that as the crises of the civilization
we're currently in intensifies,
some people in power are going to start looking to people
who are more kind of on the fringes.
You made the example of people
who are doing some kind of experimental agriculture stuff
or whatever where they're like trying to figure out
how to make a local food system or whatever.
And that's like literally one of the projects I'm doing
is trying to design local food systems
under the assumption that we're not going to have
any political momentum until there's concurrent crop failures
in two major bread basket regions of the world.
And suddenly people are like,
oh, I guess all those scientists who said things were getting bad
weren't joking or whatever.
But I think there might also be something that said,
do you think that like people who are doing things like you
and I where we're kind of,
I mean, I don't have a college degree,
but I essentially consider myself like kind of a scientist
or something like we're somewhere on the margins of science.
However we choose to define ourselves,
like maybe in the tail end of this civilization,
people who are looking at the world more like we are
and doing projects like us might end up getting infusions
of funding, resources, attention, whatever it is
to kind of like have this period of fluorescence
where we can sort of accelerate our results
maybe before everything comes.
I've got a really good example of that.
Okay, lay it on.
Lysenko.
Yeah.
Yeah, totally.
Good point.
Yeah, so that's actually something I worry about.
Similar things happened in Maoist China
where they like rolled out these head brand ideas
that were great when you were like doing the political
campaigning and I mean, you'd see all this,
it happens as well with like the Silicon Valley tech hype.
Like it's just promise after promise.
And yeah, when people are under pressure,
there's a strong tendency to fixate on something
that you think is going to be the solution
to all of your problems.
And yeah, it's funny too, because like,
if I came up with a really good set of crops
that grow well here and produce like a big surplus
like more than 10 return on investment,
I'm actually signing up the descendants of that culture
to be slaves for the warriors that come in
and like kick them in the teeth.
I actually prefer the idea of crops
that are very difficult to transport.
So do you know in the lead up to the Irish potato famine,
the potato was behind the huge spike in local population.
And the reason why is the potatoes are really easy
to hide from the tax man.
And they're very difficult to transport back to Britain.
So Ireland was basically being kept
in a sub-maximum demographic position
because the British were like creaming off
all of the surplus resources whenever they could.
And when that dynamic broke down,
the zebra population, if you want to look at it that way,
exploded and then the grass that they were eating,
the potatoes died for predictable reasons.
And it set off like this whole kind of,
you know, tidal wave through the ecosystem.
I mean, even looking at cities,
I don't know if I sent you the leak to the idea
that cities function as predators of human populations.
The city is a lion.
No, I didn't read that one.
You didn't send me that one.
But I have heard something to this effect before.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Yeah.
So basically 90% of the population used to be
in the countryside as peasants.
And when you had a run of good seasons,
like you didn't have a famine for a long period of time,
there was enough land for everyone.
So the surplus children that weren't as good
at farming, you know, weren't as well-behaved or whatever,
would be sent off to the cities.
And they go into the military,
where they'd often die in war.
They'd go into the monasteries,
where they had to cross their legs and not have babies.
Or they just end up working shit jobs in the cities
and dying of like dysentery or something
before they had a chance to produce children.
So you always need these kind of overflow,
these pressure-release valves in ecosystems.
And they've existed in human societies as well.
And it's really funny when I hear people call elites,
you know, they're predators, they're parasites,
you know, they're these monsters.
I'm like, wait a sec.
Aren't predators and parasites an essential part
of a healthy ecosystem?
Right, right, right.
Yeah.
And I don't demonize the elites.
I think they're like astronauts strapped to like
5,000 tons of TNT.
Yeah, totally.
And when they get it wrong,
they're the first people to cop it in the neck.
Yeah.
Yeah, right.
So, I mean, there's a lot of good evidence
that one of the primary paths,
I think state formation probably,
or like, you know, whatever you want to call it,
people are fuzzy on their definitions of the state,
but let's say state formation probably has happened
through a few different paths.
But one of those is that there's some stable sedentary
agricultural population that's generating a surplus
or is at least capable of doing so.
And then there's some people roaming around
to see these people and they're like,
well, we could live very easy lives
if we just enslaved this existing society.
And then in social sciences narratives,
this sequence has been reversed.
And they're like, yeah, the only way that people
managed to settle down and irrigate a field ever
or whatever was when they were paying homage
to some elites for some reason,
that's a necessary condition.
We're not exactly sure why.
But yeah, so that brings up, you know,
there's a little realm of social science.
I think James Scott has really dug into it
of looking at where people have been able to evade
like subjugation and incorporation into state structures
for longer because their crops
basically didn't produce a stable,
easily stored and readily discernible surplus.
It was stuff that was underground
or it didn't ripen all at the same time.
And then that allows us to think about
in our tail end of industrial society,
bio-engineering experiments,
how that could be a trait
that we could think about that collection of traits
for let's make stuff that doesn't ripen at the same time
or just has to really stay on the vine
and like perishes right away.
You can keep it on,
you can keep growing it for a long time
so you have the surplus locally
but you couldn't pick it
and go put it in some royal granary somewhere
or whatever.
So one kind of plant,
one kind of crop that's never existed
that I think could serve this role
and again taking inspiration from nature
often there's a symbiotic relationship
between plants and social ants
where the plant has nectories
that secrete a constant trickle of nectar
that supports the ants
and then the ants protect the plant from herbivores.
So I can see a lot of plant families
that currently are like bird pollinated
we've got a lot of them in Australia
that produce huge amounts of nectar
those flowers could be adapted
for human nectar harvesting
and there's a huge amount of energy
and work involved turning that
sugar into a dried storable form
that's energy dense enough to be worth transporting
but if you just go out and sip at the flowers every day
good luck herding people around to do that.
The ideal would be a kind of voluntary tribute
if you wanted to support a centralized power structure
you had the ability to do that
but the centralized power structure didn't have the resources
to force that tribute.
That would be ideal.
You would also need to have a metabolic adaptation
because humans can eat a bit of fructose and sucrose
but we're not particularly good at it
particularly northern Europeans where we need a lot of sugar
historically often have problems with it
but this might actually be one possible benefit
of all of the suffering that we're going through
as industrial consumers
eating these ridiculous levels of processed sugar
some among us are just like
water off a duck's back
I could go up to 80% sucrose in my diet
and I'd be A-OK
other people at 10% are hyper obese
and laying on the floor dying
it would be a replay of what happened in the early days
of shifting to a mostly fermented grain based agriculture
so where western Indo-European people
are unusually good at processing ethanol
because we've basically been drunk
for the last 10,000 years
constantly tipsy
like our water was beer
3% alcohol
and that was our superpower
and in the early days that would have been a founder effect
there would have been some individuals who tried
that lifestyle and absolutely like
kicked the bucket
they didn't make it
and other people are like
this is great I feel wonderful
back out to the fields
yeah I mean
and I think
it seems like you probably are thinking about this a lot too
all the time
about the sort of like
incredible diversity
of biologically
significant adaptations
that people are currently undergoing
even I'm reading a book about the brain structure changes
associated with literacy right now
and that's some
proportion of the human population
that I mean there's
pretty decent evidence
that it changes our overall information
processing
it's just such a fundamental
sort of like rewiring
of so many important circuits
and then of course a bunch of people are going through something analogous
with the internet now
and there is
at least some argument to be made that
a number of
behaviorally
perceptually
and at least in some cases
physiologically, metabolically
salient traits are kind of
clustering so that like
whether people are meeting on dating sites
and so there's some like psychological
homogeneity
and people's reproductive behavior
or like even you know there's good evidence that even at
like scales of settlement
into different geographic areas
people are kind of like forming more homogenous
landscapes so it's already like we're doing
some speciation
and I guess like
I often think about the founder effects
for the colonization of America
yeah totally totally
like the people with greater
curiosity and drive
and risk-taking were the ones who got
on those leaking ships and went across the Atlantic
to God knows what and the people who are like
oh no that sounds too scary I'm going to stay here
in England despite
the wars and the plague and all of the crap going on
like that's a very obvious
shift
split that reverberates
to this day
yeah exactly it's in
I think of it as a one in a long
line of sequences I bet something
like that happened
in Africa hundreds
of times and that humanity
per se as a result
of those people out surviving
people who were more
cautious and fearful and you know
all that
yeah and I guess I really wonder
I'm so
horribly anemic that I feel like I'm going
to have to end this conversation
sooner rather than later
but I wanted to circle
back around to what we were talking about
just with like for any audience
members who aren't familiar I'm not sure
we really talked about who he actually is
Lysenko was this
Soviet science will you tell us the story of
Lysenko real quick yeah yeah I did
a review on a biography I've been
recently on my blog so people can follow up
if they want more details but he was
a Ukrainian
peasant
descended agricultural scientist
who
started promoting
his own biological theories
that were inspired by a
previous generation
mature and I think
was a plant breeding expert
who it did some really interesting work
about non-genetic forms
of inheritance so Lysenko
basically took this idea and started
spouting it in his own kind of variation
and he
fell into the spotlight of
the political structure who
started featuring him as an example
of how the lower classes that had
previously been suppressed by the
evil elites that Russia had just gotten rid of
were now rising up to like feed
the nation and that they were going to solve
these agricultural crises that they have
and modernize in their own very
non-western way
and you know he kept making more and more
ridiculous promises about what he could do
and he was given this huge experimental
farm
analyses of the work that he was doing
is that it was basically chaotic
like he was just telling the
authorities what they wanted to hear
and then they were pushing out his programs
that had never really been established
as working and
he
turned on a lot of his former
friends and mentors they got sent off
to the Gulags because they refused to go
along with his extreme version
of their culturally
sanctioned type of science
they said no we need to like do things
more cautiously oh I don't think that result is actually
true that was enough
to get them sent off to the Gulag and a lot
of them died there like his former friends
were executed
and he was in the USSR
so I think he was higher than Stalin
at one point in his official rank
so it's just a really interesting
example of how
science and politics can
cross-pollinate
each other and give all sorts of
unexpected results
and I think similar
things are happening in the west at the moment
yeah absolutely
and it's like the
the
sort of uncritical acceptance
of what Lysenko was saying seems like
it played a significant role
in a lot of people going hungrier
than they necessarily should
have right yeah yeah particularly
when the plans were rolled out in China
the the Chinese imitated
what the Russians were like writing
all these pamphlets about how wonderful it was
and then Mao said oh that sounds great and then he
like ordered people to implement
it and it was impossible
but you know you get shot if you say it's
impossible so you kind of fake
it and pretend that everything's fine
yeah and I can't
I think that
I can remember if it was his work
or his predecessors work but there
was something really valid there with the
the vernalization of
wheat are you familiar with that do you know what I'm talking about
uh yeah so
when you read the full biography
the theory got like
more and more outlandish
extreme right went on yeah yeah I mean
there are epigenetic
like this window for epigenetic
change early in a seeds germination
that's definitely true
if you want to do
graft based transgenesis that's the best
time to do it and that's recently been
established by like proper research
I mean even chloroplasts will jump between
species under the right conditions
yeah um so
um yeah
so there is a kernel of truth there
but
marketing being what it is and politics being what
it is it often runs ahead of the reality
right right and
and there's a really deep irony
in that a lot you know so like
like Senko essentially
got anything that we would think of
as genetics
banned in the Soviet Union to a
significant extent and what's
so ironic about that is
Dmitri Believ who did the
very famous farm fox experiments
the fox domestication experiments
I think it was his
brother was one of the people
who got shot
under Stalin
and Believ Dmitri Believ
himself managed to kind of fly under the radar
but it's so ironic because
he and his brother were like intellectual
peers or whatever in his
experiments
are actually like this incredible
validation of the plasticity
of organisms
right and the fact that the
fundamental changes on the scale
of really speciation
can occur without like a ton
of nuclear DNA sequence changes happening
under certain conditions
with certain really plastic structures in that case
the neural crest
during embryogenesis but
I would
I keep thinking about in your blog you had
this picture
of a Chinese propaganda image
where some kids are supposedly
standing on a field of wheat that's
so dense and vital
there's such strong communist
wheat that they're like
they're literally just sailing
on top of it
but they're actually standing on stools
and you can even you don't even need
somebody to tell you like the picture
like it looks like that's what's happening
you know I mean I'm sure there's people
who saw that and were like oh hey like some kids
are standing on some stools in that wheat field
and they don't say anything because
they'd get shot for noticing
but you know like with the kind
of stuff we're doing I keep you know it's like
in my head there's all these
potential moments
of crisis and conversation
with people in power
about what
methodology or world
view or tentative
experimental procedure or whatever
they're going to kind of orient to
and I and I keep
wondering like
how when that time comes
do we
navigate that chaos
and present real
as opposed to totally
insane
like fake versions of what
we're doing because certainly the people
in power don't know the difference they're not
you know they're all like business majors
and economists they don't know
what's real and what's fake in
these worlds that we're spending our lives in
do you have thoughts about that
I'm
not a particularly political
animal
what I'm doing I view
as the equivalent of a seed
like a really durable seed that I'm creating
that's basically just
get a lay low
drop into
various locations without a lot of
and just sit there and wait
for the well I mean in Australia
it would be a bushfire that rages over the top
and then the seeds are like oh close this clear
let's rock
but just a
good experiment that I often like to float
so just on the
idea of like population decline and collapse
and like it's going to be like Mad Max
and everyone's going to be screaming and running from the asteroid
that kind of shit
so at the moment
the global population has
an annual 2% birth rate
so for every 100 people two babies are born
and one person dies
if you rounded off to whole numbers
so that means there's a net 1% growth rate
which means the population
is on track to double every 72 years
and like 1%
sounds like nothing until you look at compounding and you're like oh shit
like where are we going to put like
twice as many people in that
like three generations that's crazy
and
the power of compounding
works the other way around so if we
flip to a world where we have two deaths
and one birth
for every 100 people every year
we now have a 1% decline
and we have
a population in three generations
and if you change
from one of those worlds to the other the 1% growth
to 1% decline
your year isn't dramatically different
you go from two births
and one funeral to two funerals and one birth
and
where the problem comes
is economic
so the economic and political system around it
that we built has adapted
to ridiculous growth
like I think 3% growth rate has been average
for the last century and a bit
which is like just completely unprecedented
if we kept that up
and became a space-faring species
in less than a thousand years
every single star in the galaxy
would be like used
we'd be everywhere and now we'd be having the same problem
of like how do we manage growth
but we'd be fighting over dilithium crystal
crystals if all of that
was possible
so we're going to have to figure this out sooner or later
my guess is that
we're going to put it into a steady decline
that there will be demographic
and economic and political crap
that just becomes part of the background
learning to lower your resource
requirements
and develop these skills on the side
is the way to go
I mean I still go to the supermarket and buy food
my goats are still in electric fences
because that's the reality of what I live in right now
and for a while
I was like okay I'm going to put a year aside
and I'm going to absolutely flog myself
into that year
my joints
like from all of that work at the end of that year
would probably mean that the amount of useful work
I can do in the next decade
would be diminished
so it's not worth it
it's better to focus on
positive ROI per project
and do it on a small enough scale
to just maintain everything for as long as possible
because my feeling is that
sometime in the next 20 years
there will be an increasing interest
and my responsibility is to
pass those resources on to the next generation
because when you're a gardener
particularly in a variable climate
and when you're working with trees
you start to realise how short life is
I've got 20 good seasons in me
maximum I'll be 65 then
and even then I'll be slowing down severely
that's also enough time to do
one generation of my staple
tree I've got a nut tree
that I'm trying to domesticate
it's a fun little project so I'm in the middle
of the
natural distribution for this
tree from the Jurassic era
it gets these cones on the size of
basketballs with spines all over it
and they're full of these big starchy nuts
like chestnuts and they grow like weeds here
they're amazing
so I wanted to domesticate these
so I've gathered all the diversity I can
from the remnant populations before they die out here
but I'm like no that's not enough
I need more diversity, more diversity
hybridisation and the only thing I can find to hybridise
is from South America, the other end of
Gondwana that like drifted away
40 million years ago
so I've got a species from South America
that I'm growing in amongst the Australian species
and my life's work
is to live long enough that I can hybridise
these things on mass
and then send those seeds all over the planet
so this tree is compatible
with goats and cows
it produces massive crops, not always
it's massed, it varies year to year
so you need other crops to balance it out
the tropics down to the coastal
temperate zones
it could be a huge crop
and it would reduce people's reliance on
annuals
that's so
my last question
who's going to do it if I don't
that's very interesting
my last question was going to be like
so what's next
what's the ultimate but that sounds like it
that's the thesis of your
that's great
so interesting
what's that like
you're growing them
you have them staggered at different stages
of growth at this point
and you're culling them
what's the actual process like right now
at this stage they're mostly small seedlings
that are over the majority of
the space
so I think the largest ones are probably about
my height that went in first
is test plantings just to get my technique right
you can't just say one year
I'm going to plant a thousand of these things
because for one thing that could be a drought year
and they all die without irrigation
and you can't irrigate on that scale
so I kind of have to pick my moments
and also the technique of like how you
propagate them, how you plant them, how you place them
the timing, whether the goats are actually
going to graze them or not like all of these take time
to build up those layers of technique
and you could go 20 kilometers
down the road and try and do the exact same thing
if it doesn't work
you've got Fuka Woka
the Japanese experimental farmer
I don't think I do, no
he wrote a book called One Straw Revolution
where he did a similar thing to what I'm doing
in his book
he warns people
this is how I did it
but don't just copy
what I said I do, what worked for me
focus on all of the steps I took
leading to the point of figuring out what worked
in my particular paddock
and he had students who taught
they worked alongside him for like
years and years and years
went to another part of Japan
and tried to reproduce his methods
completely failed
just didn't work because they were
it's like trying to build a rhinoceros
like just putting all the cells together
based on memory, like you've got to grow it
from one cell and it will adapt
like its bones will be stronger
so it'll be better at sweating
its nutrient intake
tolerances will adjust
starting from that one cell
it's why I'm a big believer in founder effect
particularly if it's a hybrid
I mean humans are hybrids
humans are hybrids, this is a really interesting
topic that I didn't get to talk about
let's talk about it
just quickly, so we know it's been established
like nobody argues with the experts
that we have
whatever the early modern humans were
they hybridized with Neanderthals
with Denisovans to make Europeans
and Asians
also crossed to something in Africa
that we don't exactly know what it was
but it's very archaic
this individuals with like 20% of their DNA
is from this archaic
bridge of humanity
it branched off way before Neanderthals and Denisovans
no idea what it is because there's no fossils
in that region
there is a lot of genetic diversity in humans
from hybridization
in the last 60,000 years
then you have the founder events
of the
Proto-Indo-Europeans
the Bantu's and some group in Asia
that's not as well defined
that create the majority of the population
alive today
that had these massive expansion events
when they tapped into agriculture
but there's something even more interesting
way back in our history
so there's a scientist
a PhD geneticist
who studies vertebrate hybridization
called Eugene McCarthy
I've bought his books because it's just amazing
he has like done compendiums
of like bird hybridization
birds hybridize all the time
within the last 20 years
there was a Galapagos finch
that got blown to a different island
hybridized with the species that it encountered
because it was the only one of its kind there
and created a new species
like within a few generations
so birds do this really really easily
mammals do it as well too
but a little bit harder that our genes
our chromosomes are a bit bigger and chunky compared to birds
a bit truckier but it does happen in mammals
I mean like we said Neanderthals
if you think there are different species we hybridize with them
so he looked at human evolution
and said okay you've got these
very chimp-like ancestors for a long period of time
and then you get this sudden break
where all of these morphological changes
happen leading into
early hominins
and he's like
could that have been a hybridization event
could something
relatively distantly related to a chimpanzee
have made it with chimpanzees
and created a hybrid population
that probably back crossed to chimpanzees
but left a
significant lingering genomic
genetic whatever
fingerprint so he made a list
of all of the morphological traits
of humans that aren't present
in chimpanzees and it's a really long list
we've got all these weird things about us that just popped out of nowhere pretty much simultaneously
and he's like well what could it have been
what has the same traits
and the only thing that turned up
was the pig
so his
theory is that humans are
a relatively recent
pig-chimp hybrid
it was probably a male pig and a female chimpanzee
based on their ranges and behaviors
and that female chimpanzees hybrid
was probably raised among the chimpanzees
and extensively back crossed to them
until there were enough of those hybrids
to break off and form
the founding population for humans
and the fact that that was the case
means that
something about this
very strange new genome
was advantageous right
that the descendants
of the first generation
descendants of the pig
chimpanzee mating had
something going on
so the most critical thing
if you look at the physiology
so pigs are one of the few species that have active
cooling so the way
the blood flows to their skin
allows them to thermoregulate in a way
that no other animals can
humans do the same thing
we've got the same architecture of arteries
that flush the skin when we're overheating
that allows our brain
to get larger without cooking
our body through all of the metabolic activity
so one of the limitations
on chimpanzee intelligence and brain size
is actually thermoregulation
I've heard that before
wow
that's great
that's beautiful
and the way you're feeling right now
is probably the way that Christians
felt a few hundred years ago
when they learned Darwin's theory
that we were descended from chimps
and they went oh my god that's disgusting
those horrible filthy animals
like swinging around in the jungles
we've got nothing to do with them
and yeah welcome to that feeling
yeah except I am on the tail end
of a psychological distribution
beautiful is that
that we were once a pig chimpanzee hybrid
you know
and when you look at this from
like a modern evidence seeking
scientific point of view
it's difficult because it happened
long enough ago
that the back crossing has probably erased
any genomic signatures
and he went looking for it he found collaborators
and they thought they had a signal but then they realized it was spurious
so he actually
I trust this guy like he's honest about
the evidence that he has
and the quality of it
but there is one really really weird thing
so human mitochondrial DNA
is really really bottlenecked
I mean we're one of the most inbred species on the planet
we are like a big hive
so our mitochondrial DNA
has very very limited ranges of diversity
if you look at chimpanzee DNA
it's really really diverse
there's lots and lots of different subgroups
but one of them
is really really closely related
to human mitochondrial DNA
with very very little changes
so it doesn't match the apparent amount of
shuffling that's happened in the rest of the genome
it looks like it's
emerged relatively recently
so all the molecular clocks that we're using
to like figure out
how old that branch
of chimp and human was
they might be a little bit warped
if it was actually a hybridization event
because they assume a constant rate of like trickle
mutation
rather than these like atom bomb hybridizations
that just mess up the genome on every level
what do you think about
I mean
there's a few major bottlenecks
it seems like
but I've heard this theory
that seems pertinent to what we're talking about
which is like maybe
cognitive modernity comes about
as is like
associated with one of those bottlenecks
you know what I mean
do you think there's some plausibility there
I would say definitely
and I mean you only have to look at the neurodiversity
around today
assuming you could trace it back to coherent
genetic foundations
assuming it's that simple
you could take those weirdos and stick them on an island
and you would have a tribe of weirdos
I don't know if you want them to have like
trained fetishes
or all the bizarre things that people do
that have
some degree of heritability
you could probably select for that if you really wanted to
the other weird thing about this
wide hybridization event
is that modern research science
demands reproducibility
but by its very nature
this is an unlikely event
if you did like a million chimp pig
matings
you would probably only get one of them producing
a viable enough offspring to then back cross
it
and that doesn't work in our current lab environments
and research funding
so it's kind of the
epistemological
equivalent of a miracle
yeah
well you know
the constraints of the laboratory
aren't going to be around forever
exactly
and if you can foster a culture
that is open
and logical experimentation
that takes a long term view of these kind of things
I mean imagine
it just boggles the mind about what the possibilities are
yeah and I'm trying to
I don't know how far
I'm going to get in what form of this
but right now I'm working with this
this new group
that I formed out of the podcast
there's like maybe 20 of us or so right now
and we
we're trying to develop these
many things we're trying to do is develop these kind of like
viable local food systems
and
I am really
excited to begin like one aspect
of this for me is that I'm going to finally
it's been a couple years
since I've grown food at scale and I'm not
in an environment to do it I'm in an apartment building
but I am going to start
I'm very interested
in part of this system being
like the little kind of infusion
of extra
like well extra edible calories
and some like biomaterials
for energy production
coming out of algae right I'm
very interested in algae production
and so I'm going to start
you know
somewhere on some surface
that I'm going to either claim or make
in this apartment I'm going to start
my little my little like
you know genetic
experiment with algae and
and try to try to
get some useful traits that
you know like higher like
there's a real possibility for significant
biofuel production which
we're talking about doing like very limited
biofuels that would just perpetuate
a system where we could
do like some kinds of climate control
in those days of very
extreme weather like what we're seeing here
is that again the mean
the mean of the temperature
and precipitation doesn't matter so much
as those wild shifts
that happen sometimes and we're like trying
to think of systems that you could deploy
to protect crops
on those days that
you know it's just that they're going to be
killing heat or killing cold
and some of those need a little electricity
so like you know algae where
you you can cultivate it and then
separate the proteins like
edible proteins and then the lipids
for the biofuels right and so
I'm beginning this very very very
very rudimentary
experimental process in my home
but I am very excited to be able
to say that I'm like now part of
the you know the DIY
biohacker or whatever
you know but it's so truly
exciting it's just really
this is the thing so people
who have lots of space like me
it's very easy for all of your time
just to be tuned up with production
you have to make a real effort
to like concentrate in on things like
hand pollination those little fiddly things
they take a few years to like get a feel
for what you're doing I would encourage
people who don't have lots of space but do
have a little bit of resources
and like a little bit of space and time
they've got attention that's the thing
that we're lacking and
even if you've only got like a
I don't know like a bench top
tissue plant tissue culture
set up of like a couple of square feet
you could be doing work that
no one else in the world
is even thinking about doing
all sorts of like hybridization
transgenesis
all the fiddly things like I'm planning on doing
a big
quinoa you know the ancient grain
I'm gathering genetics of that
it doesn't naturally outcross
so I'm gonna have to do hand pollination with it
and it's like almost microscopic
so that work is
going to I'll be I'll be cross-eyed by the end of it
but once I get through that first generation
then it's easy from that point on
but that's the kind of work that
people with more attention
than space could consider doing
and I would encourage you to get involved
with the land race
plant breeding community
I would even have you on
my podcast. Joseph Lofthaus
is kind of like the godfather
of the movement he's been growing
crops in the high desert of Utah and
doing this kind of evolutionary
crop breeding
and he started the podcast and I've recently
come on as co-host
and I'm also interested
to talk to people who are
about to start that kind of project
not just people who have been doing it for years
and have results to talk about
because I think that has a wider
interest to audiences who are interested
in the idea but they haven't actually done it
yet they don't know where to start
so taking you through the
thought process about how you
manage risk and
direct resources to what's going to
most likely pay off
is something that I'm interested in. Yeah
and it is it's like I really did notice
this perceptual shift where
I have a couple of times in my life
been on some piece of property with some people
and we had some pretty big ambitions
and I've grown food in that way
and then
but I noticed this big perceptual shift
when I was like I'm going to cultivate
something somewhere in my house
where then my whole environment
I started to perceive differently
and I was once again in that headspace
I started from living on an urban farm
where I was looking at highway
medians and little scraps of land
and I was like nobody would care
or notice if I decided to like
turn that up and do whatever I wanted
with it and you know like
it's like that old gorilla gardener
in me that hasn't really
been active in a long time
came back really fast and that's
so fun. But you need the right genetic
diversity to do it. Yeah
If you take broccoli that's like being bread
in the main house. Oh, of course.
No luck. But if you hybridize
it with some like weedy relatives
you could end up with something that can
take care of itself when you're not there
and it's still actually worth harvesting at the end.
Yeah, exactly, exactly
and so that's something that
literally almost everybody can do somewhere
almost nobody lives in an environment
that's literally
entirely inhospitable
to life everywhere within walking distance.
That's wonderful.
It's wonderful. It's
exciting time in history
and I just like to point out to people
that right now we have
a global internet so you can find
people and resources
and you can talk to people really easily
and we have a global payment system
which is like even when I was young
didn't exist. So if you want to buy
something from someone on the other side of the world you can get it
and then we have a mailing system
that like for like
it's practically a teleporting like
that's how miraculous it is.
And during the pandemic
particularly the postal system started to like
sputter a little bit, it was having difficulties
it may not be around forever
so for someone off in the middle of nowhere
with no locally
adapted crop history
gather the resources while you can
and all over the world
do this while the opportunity lasts
because given that the internet is the
largest, most complicated, most
resource consuming machine that we've ever built
it wouldn't be hard for it to just
go fist bump and not be there the next day
I mean all the components
come out of Taiwan
like a geopolitically
contested tiny island
off the coast of China it's like
who thought that was a good idea?
Yeah and I guess
there's really something to be said for this notion
that so many people are also experiencing
this intense
isolation that is very
relatively historically recent
and as far as kind of like endeavors
or common
perceptions and you know
conceivable joint projects
to get people out of that mode
I mean everybody knows this thing is going to collapse
that's pretty non-ideological
regardless of where
else ever people's
perceptions diverge
people all kind of know this thing isn't going to be around
or I think most people have some sense of that
My guess is that
the average person will die at home
in their 60s
rather than in a nursing home in their 70s
so if that seems like the apocalypse
I'm like no I would rather take the former
option I don't want to be strapped down
and medicated and kept alive nobody wants to be there
this is the funny thing
like our culture says oh we worship
medicine because it prevents
suffering imagine all the suffering
no we've kind of
reached the it's kind of 50-50
like yeah swing some roundabouts
we're at a point in the climate in terms
I mean I spent three years on dialysis
so I really saw
the you know like the people
who are on the like who don't have any hope
of a transplant or whatever and are just kind of
in that prolongation of suffering
phase and I don't support
it
but yeah but that's like
I mean I really do I think there's something to be said
for like that being just an exciting way
to kind of see the world
and do stuff
with people is to say like hey there's
this real need for us to like
you know we're gonna become like a little bit less
of spectators in our lives and more
of direct participants and we're gonna have to build
the systems that we
rely on to survive and isn't that kind
of fun to get to go wander
around Portland Oregon or wherever you
happen to be and like just kind
of look at stuff and think like well how could we
use this like while there's still an internet
and all this you know and like
an infinity of scientific papers to
consult like what could we do with this
you know that's it's pretty exciting
I have no hope
in the large political
structures persisting because they've
never existed on that scale before because
they require the resources
and the technology to make them possible
the ecological equivalent is when a really
big tree falls down in the forest that's
previously been like taking all of the sunlight
and water for itself when it finally
goes down suddenly there's
all this space for a diversity of shrubs
and herbs and all these other things
to pop up in the vacuum that's
created so our job
basically is to
to survive in the shade but prepare
for the sun
yep yep yep yeah totally
which is a common dynamic as you
point out in your blog like collapse
opens up space
mass extinctions open up
space for speciation and collapse opens up
a lot of space for
social possibility that
isn't there and you can even look
at the whole industrial experiment
favorably
as a way of sweeping away
all of those entrenched
systems from the past that just
kind of you know they got cobbled together
originally based on a few random
hybrids that became
the crops that were the foundation for everything
and maybe we can do better
maybe we can do something completely different
so before we end
I mean I will definitely put links
to all your projects in the show
description but you mentioned another
podcast so just tell us all your
projects one final time
everything people can check out
so the farming blog
experimental farming blog is at SUPSAC
zero input agriculture
at the SUPSAC site
my podcast which I've only started doing recently
but we're churning out a couple of episodes a month
is the going to seed podcast
with Joseph Lofthouse and Shane Simonson
and my fiction
is under the pen named Haldane B. Doyle
so the easiest way to find
everything there is to go to my author website
www.haldanebdoyle.com