Title: Metamorphosis pt 3 1 the Rupture in the Fabric of Reality Model of Human Cognition
Episode #: 64
Episode ID: 13080940
Source: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/13080940-metamorphosis-pt-3-1-the-rupture-in-the-fabric-of-reality-model-of-human-cognition.mp3
------------------------------------------------------------

=== EPISODE METADATA ===
Generated: 2026-01-12 01:02:06
Episode ID: 13448961
MP3 File: 13448961-seeds-of-the-world-tree-programs-of-revolutionary-biology-and-evolutionary-politics.mp3
Title: Seeds of the World Tree: Programs of Revolutionary Biology and Evolutionary Politics
Podcast/Artist: Against the Internet
Album/Series: Fight Like An Animal
Source URL: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/13448961-seeds-of-the-world-tree-programs-of-revolutionary-biology-and-evolutionary-politics.mp3
========================
to the branches up high in the sky.
There's trees, ashes, or one side at the center of time.
Greetings, friends.
I'm Arnold Schroeder, and this is Fight Like an Animal,
a podcast of the World Tree Center for Survival
and Evolution, or the World Tree Center
for Evolutionary Politics and Global Survival,
or the Nine Worlds One Tree Institute for Applied Survival
Sciences or something.
We'll have to figure out a name, but whatever it is,
that's what this episode is about.
And you can find episode bibliographies
at againsttheinternet.com.
There's not one in this case, but I
will be reading a document briefly describing
all of the different initiatives of this project
that I am launching with this episode.
And so you can find that at againsttheinternet.com
for this episode.
And if you want to support this work materially,
please check out patreon.com slash biological singularity.
But if you want to support this work in a far more
directly participatory manner, please, friends, keep listening.
This episode can certainly be listened to on its own,
but to a significant extent, it's
a successor to the Ashes of the World Tree episode that
was just released.
So if you feel like you want some broader context
about the fundamental worldview that
animates these projects I'm going to describe,
go ahead and check that out if you haven't already.
My mercilessly concise one sentence summary
would be that that episode was me attempting
to describe how just as surely as perceptions of whether
or not the ecological crisis is happening at all
or any other political issue are a matter of temperament
more than they are purely rational deliberation or anything
we might call scientific reasoning,
so are people's perceptions who converge
on the reality of the ecological crisis of what
is possible to do at this stage of crisis.
And that, I guess, is probably two sentences, right?
Maybe even three.
But that it would look very different to do
a form of politics that was not an attempt
to validate an extant worldview and that wasn't deeply
affected by a sort of primary emotional reality of trauma
response to a verse stimulus or a need
to tell ourselves a story that allows us
to avoid a sense of tragic implications
about the world trajectory.
But rather to do a politics that was truly just based
on and consisting of a rigorous systemic inquiry
into what is in fact possible in the situation
we find ourselves in.
So the World Tree Center for Evolution and Survival
or something like that is my attempt
to initiate a project, responding to and pursuant
of the broad conception of global possibility
that I tried to articulate in that episode.
I think one of the things that distinguishes the kind of politics
that I am trying to practice from those
that I have been critiquing is that it should be pretty
manifestly apparent to almost anybody
that a number of radically distinct futures
are possible and that we should be attempting
to achieve a program of influencing our circumstances
that would be meaningful and impactful
across a wide range of different potential futures.
And so these projects all kind of have this quality
where there's work of a very immediate variety
that I think would have useful impacts right here
and now today, but that there is definitely some sense
of there being an anticipation of a significant degree
of collapse in the social systems we're inhabiting
as a result of ecological collapse,
if not from some other factors first.
And these being means by which we could potentially intervene
in the conjoined social and ecological trajectories
as the traditional forms of power,
the extent forms of power that are being exercised
in this society become unstable
because of the crises they have engendered.
You know, Hannah Ardent said that the Bolsheviks
found power lying around on the street
and picked it up or something like that.
I think to a significant extent,
I agree with that assessment,
but I think that there was a bunch of things
that they did that allowed them
to pick up power off the street
at the expense of all the other people
who were trying to do precisely that,
but that a wide range of the utility of these,
the possible utilities of these projects
comes from the assumption
that perhaps there's going to be
further destabilizations of the system,
what with the global ecosystem rapidly plummeting
into chaos.
Yeah, so I'll go ahead and read
from this document describing
what I guess are going to be,
we could maybe say that there's five initial initiatives,
maybe six.
So there's the one sentence kind of summary,
the World Tree Center is a set of parallel institutions
for ecological governance in a think tank
dedicated to searching for paths
to survival for life on earth.
The first of these initiatives is the only one
that actually has a name that has been decided on
and has its first kind of real manifestation.
The first project of this initiative
is going to be released into the world
within days of this episode
as both a podcast and as a video on YouTube.
It will be the first publication
of the World Tree Center YouTube channel.
It seems like by the time I'm done with this episode,
I will have just decided this thing
is called the World Tree Center.
So we're calling it the
embodied political cognition collective,
formerly the transformation of temperament
and worldview working group.
And the description I wrote of it is,
nothing remains to be said about the ecological crisis
other than that individuals are massively variable
and their responsiveness to it.
It's abundantly clear to even a casual observer
that the widely diversion of worldviews
present in contemporary populations
reflect underlying temperaments,
but temperament is rarely addressed
as an intrinsic dimension of politics.
A wealth of research exists on the many variables
which correlate with political perspectives,
but very little on how transformations
of worldviews occur.
The embodied political cognition collective
will attempt to produce a systemic understanding
of how people undergo the transformation
in their embodied states of being
necessary to comprehend and respond
to our converging crises.
This will be an iterative process
consisting roughly speaking of three phases.
First is a period of literature review,
broad hypothesis formation and narrative collection.
Some of these narratives will be presented
on a new podcast.
So continuing work initially broadly described
in Fight Like an Animal and this podcast
is called Medinoya, How World Views Change.
Medinoya is defined as a change in one's way of life
resulting from penitence or spiritual conversion.
And in it, we will collect descriptions of people's journey
to an ecologically responsive worldview
from a wide range of initial starting points
as well as discuss and attempt
to theoretically integrate what we're hearing as we go.
Second is a period of explicit hypothesis formation,
research design and further data collection for that research.
And then third will be a period in which we attempt
to apply protocols we have developed
in the course of our research to, for instance,
group processes, media gatherings,
whatever else emerges from our work.
So in other words, if the second stage
is an attempt to formulate hypotheses
and test them through formal research projects
about how to affect people's perceptions,
the third stage will be an attempt
to actually apply these ostensible methods
and attempt to affect people's perceptions.
Okay, the second of these initiatives
for the time being, I've just been calling the meta group.
What I said about it is a broad segment of humanity
is acutely aware of our profound peril,
but political engagement and ecological collapse
is confined to a much narrower,
psychologically distinct subset of these individuals.
This has become arguably the most fundamental barrier
to meaningful political engagement.
People stay home because they correctly anticipate
a meaningless spiral of internal critique
and decisions and behaviors
which reflect specialized worldviews
and niche reasoning far more
than they do strategic deliberation.
The meta group will attempt to overcome this barrier
by constructing prompts and frames for group engagement
that are far more psychologically selective
and likely to generate legitimate cohesion
than the exceptionally broad frames
such as fighting climate change,
whereby groups are typically constituted.
We will begin by assessing the value
of the podcast's fight like an animal
and its transformative narrative spinoff,
metanoia, as psychological filters
engaging a distinct segment of the population.
These podcasts, in addition to extent relationships,
will be used to recruit people into World Tree Center.
The hypothesis is that the listenership
is motivated by empathy, but also tough-minded,
willing to engage with biological explanations
of human behavior and interact with technical subjects.
We will also apply an application process
involving a number of extant psychometrics
as well as some that are unique to World Tree.
Therefore, we will refine our assumptions as we go,
collecting data about what kinds of people turn out
to get along in what ways
and to fill what kinds of roles.
Now, I've been talking more with my collaborator
about what it is that we think we are the criterion,
the singular overarching criterion
that we think we're most concerned with
in engaging people within any of these initiatives,
within this broad overall project.
And we've kind of consensed on this notion
that what we're really looking for
is the capacity to engage with complexity
in assessing the state of the world
and political possibilities and all that, right?
That we are trying to find people
who can engage in complexity
rather than indulging psychological need
in the conclusions that they come to about reality.
So I said, this group will also begin
to psychographically and otherwise segment
various populations and develop targeted messaging
about other World Tree initiatives.
For instance, with respect
to the Regional Resource Plan Initiative,
which I'm about to describe,
we might ask, how can we make an appeal
to participation in this project
framed in terms of the Jeffersonian, human,
farmer conception of American democracy?
In broad terms, we will attempt to deconstruct
the narratives that unite distinct segments
of the population, formulate hypotheses
about these sub-population psychologies
and their fundamental frames of reference
and target messaging to those psychologies
and within those frames.
Now, as we gain momentum,
we may also provide consultations with other groups
both about creating cohesion within the groups themselves
and targeting campaign messages and whatnot to other people.
So for long-term listeners of the podcast,
that may sound awfully familiar as what I attempted to do
with the establishment
of the Scientific Militant Discord Server
way back when I think initially proposed
in the episodes Suburb and Holy War
and referenced to some extent in the world,
got a lot like the internet a little before that,
the effort that really didn't go anywhere
what with the cancer and the kidney failure and all.
And so anybody who I have been in touch with
or was on that Discord server, anything like that,
I'll certainly be getting in touch with
to see about coming onto the new non-discord,
online collaborative workspace
that we've set up for these projects.
The next initiative in parenthetically non-coercive,
scientific world government.
I thought I'd choose a name
with a nice polemical ring to it,
something to get some Fox News pundits a little upset
and therefore, you know,
to generate the outraged denunciations
that actually ultimately generate political credibility.
I said, it has become a climate cliche
to say that every disaster movie
starts with a scientist being ignored,
but it is also worth noting that what happens next
is that the scientist proceeds to do something other
than continue talking to the people who aren't listening.
This project will focus on initiating a process
of interdisciplinary scientific deliberation
on the relationship between the ecological crisis,
political power and science itself.
This process of scientific deliberation
would be dedicated to examining thresholds
for declaring the strategy of issuing warnings
to policymakers to have decisively failed
and the options for asserting a different political system
capable of responsiveness.
It would attempt to engender a scientific case for revolution
because another scientific consensus statement
that says scientists say the crisis
is going to be really, really, really bad,
won't get any attention,
but one that says scientists say
that political revolution is necessary
to avoid global collapse will.
This process would examine how scientists
could offer an alternative to extant forms of power
as crisis intensifies and people search for institutions
which exhibit competence current ones lack.
Of course, for a cohort of scientists
to identify one another who could meaningfully pursue
any of these objectives, they would have to do so
other than by some broad criterion
such as shared endorsement of the disembodied abstractions
by which the scientific process is typically defined.
In other words, they would have to examine
the psychological corollaries of their own beliefs
about the ecological crisis
and the power structures and responsiveness to it
and those of divergent scientific theories.
To that end, this would be a process
of engaging with the psychological differences
between scientists,
applying the methods whereby scientists study
the psychology of belief systems in others to themselves.
To that end, the first step in this project has been taken
with the submission of a scientific paper
identifying four broad domains
of stalled scientific progress,
the ecological crisis being one of them
where investigating the underlying psychology
is likely to generate interesting results.
So I'm rather proud of this paper.
I submitted it to the Seeds of Science Journal
a little while ago and they liked to the first draft.
We had an exchange where we talked about some revisions
and they said not to worry terribly about the word limit.
So I radically revised the paper
and I have not heard back.
I think that there might be some vacation involved
or something like that,
but I think that there's a very decent chance
that it will be published and will be assigned
a DOI and searchable in the literature.
The publication process for Seeds of Science
is supposed to be much, much more hasty
than with most scientific journals.
It's supposed to take about 60 days.
So I think there is a real value in this case
of trying to actually get some of these initial arguments
that are being made into the scientific literature
per se.
So for the time being I am going to refrain
from publishing that on my website or anywhere else
or the forthcoming World Tree website
and I will email it to people where it seems relevant
to people who are working on this.
But I think there's at least one more paper
involving the psychology of power
and the psychology of science per se
versus other academic disciplines
and particular academic disciplines
which tend to be paths to institutional power
in mass hierarchical societies
regardless of their ideological self descriptions.
And then it would be probably pretty worthwhile
to consider beginning to publish papers
somewhere in the literature by people
who are actually like current participants
in scientific institutions.
And a whole bunch of other strategic considerations
occur to me, I think that the generation
of consensus statements within various disciplines,
ultimately interdisciplinary consensus statements,
stuff like that would be really fascinating.
This is stuff I've talked about in for instance
varieties of scientific revolution and myth science power.
This notion that the idea of political organizing
in general like the models that are still being used
in a lot of forms of organizing
assume far greater epistemic cohesion
in the broader society than actually exists.
But that level of epistemic cohesion really does exist
within science per se to some extent
and that this would be kind of like
how a lot of that political organizing is supposed to work
where there would certainly be a polemical quality.
Some of these publications would probably be met
with fervent criticism and that fervent criticism
would function to ultimately legitimize,
publicize and legitimize the positions
that are being advanced.
So that's that initiative.
And then regional resource plans.
This is certainly something I've discussed a number of times
but in particular in that episode
a model political program for ecological survival
which is also a text against the internet.com.
And this would be I think one of the first initiatives
hopefully that the meta group would apply
some of its research to in terms of trying to identify
distinct psychographic and demographic segments
of the population in whatever given geographic unit
we decided to make a resource plan
for Portland, Oregon, certainly occurs to me
as a likely first step, you know
and think about how to present what we're doing
in different terms to different kinds of people.
I said about it because no existing resource planning
for any polity at any scale comprises a comprehensive
and ecologically plausible plan
for meeting basic human needs.
This project would generate such plans.
These would also provide a natural basis
for collective decision-making structures
which could emerge at any time
but seem particularly likely in time of crisis.
For instance, when food shortages begin
as a result of concurrent crop failures
and major food producing regions of the world.
These efforts would be based
on existing resource planning documents
and would begin with an inventory of population needs
and its potential consumption based on a hierarchy
of ascending resource availability assumptions.
At a lowest tier would be, for instance,
food, energy production sufficient to keep some medical
and other vital equipment running
and other materials and processes necessary
to literally facilitate survival.
These plans would be spatially explicit
and provide a basis for political interventions
allowing us to offer an alternative
in conjunction with other world tree initiatives
to extant structures, something that is particularly
likely to be sought by considerable numbers during crisis.
So in addition to the ashes of the world tree episode
and a model political program for ecological survival
and some other episodes where I've touched on this,
something that I also was talking with Daniel about
in the last fight like an animal episode,
social cohesion versus the internet
versus the establishment versus the earth.
And I think that I mentioned
that the food production potential on Portland's golf courses
alone is quite significant.
So this would be some effort to produce some,
like spatially explicit, quantitatively explicit
food production plans and then also some stuff
like the appropriation of industrial facilities
sufficient to generate biofuels adequate to produce,
not the levels of power that we're consuming
as part of a global consumer civilization,
but levels of power sufficient to keep hospitals running
like a radically constrained material flow
and resource availability assumption rate,
but enough to keep people alive literally.
Yeah, so that work is great fun
depending on the kind of polity one lives in,
there are or are not certain documents
that can be used to provide a guide to doing
essentially a real version,
one that is actually congruent with the physical reality
we inhabit of the kinds of climate plans
that exist in, for instance, most liberal cities,
some states with majority democratic legislatures
and stuff like that,
but which admittedly don't exist everywhere
in the United States or anything like that.
But something that I've worked on in the past
and really enjoyed and I think it would be great fun
for people with a certain kind of,
both a technical mind and a love of generating media
and documents and policy proposals
that are sure to infuriate, horrify
and enrage certain segments of the population
who it would be useful to infuriate, horrify and enrage
for disseminating and validating our message.
So the last initiative that I've written about
is just titled for the time being
greenhouse gas sequestration and synthetic biology.
So certainly this is something I've talked about
in quite a few episodes as well.
What I wrote is it is likely that greenhouse gas flux
out of the atmosphere needs to be hastened
in order for most complex life to survive.
A large number of promising means of achieving
this hastening exists,
but they are being utterly neglected
by investors and governments in favor of projects
which show very little substantial promise,
such as facilities devoted
to mechanical direct air capture of CO2.
This project would research promising approaches,
generate media about them to dissuade people
from the notion that geoengineering is a monolithic category
that can simply be disregarded
and with sufficient resources begin to do research
and demonstration projects for some methods
that seem particularly likely to be impactful.
The initial subset of approaches we would investigate
are genetic engineering and ecological manipulations
related to methanotrophic bacteria, enhanced weathering,
increased photosynthetic efficiency,
desalination and transport of water
to low vegetation terrestrial landscapes
to generate significant new biomass,
ocean fertilization, both through direct seeding
and through assisted upwelling in regions
where nutrients are currently sequestered
on the ocean floor, and yeah, and that's it.
But I wrote enhanced weathering twice.
I guess because whatever, it doesn't matter.
At one point I tried to initiate a project like that
and that was another case where people showed up
and it seemed like it really had some promise
and then I got too sick, anyway.
This project would also generally attempt
to participate in synthetic biology's role
in transforming human ecology
to a post-resource extraction regime
and play a role in directing sociopolitical outcomes
from the profound egalitarian potential
of generating decentralized non-monopolizable abundance.
So yeah, I have become a real synthetic biology fanatic
in recent months and years
and I will do an episode sooner rather than later,
probably really pretty soon,
about the potential that I see there.
It's, I think, just utterly fascinating.
I came to it through reading literature
but at some point realizing the significance
of what I was reading, I kind of thought,
okay, people must be writing books of insane hype
about how this is gonna completely change everything.
And they are, I've read a few.
The one that I would probably recommend above all others
is the Genesis machine.
But yeah, I will also be producing some media
about that pretty soon.
And so this, as with a bunch of these projects,
we can see two very different tiers of possibility
depending on whether or not we get any resources.
So at a low involvement and essentially no budget level,
we could produce some papers and some other media
that I think would be really useful.
And then at a much higher level of resources,
we could do some of this research.
So the last thing that I would mention
even though it's not in this document
as the days of planning and work on this project
have gone by, I've begun to realize
that there probably is a six initiative
that just deserves to be its own distinct structure
that I initially was imagining.
Yeah, that doesn't make any sense.
I don't know why I was thinking that.
I was initially thinking it would just be part
of the meta group, which is we are gonna have a real need
for just kind of like a media production entity
that is taking all of the different research findings
and the kind of like psychographic conclusions,
the targeted messaging findings of the meta group
and generating media that is directed
to specific audiences to convey specific messages
that we're conceiving of.
And so I just kind of thought that would be like,
okay, well, the meta group will identify a population
and something to say to them
and then they'll just make a YouTube video about it
or whatever, but I increasingly realized
that there's probably gonna be,
those are distinct enough tasks.
Somebody might wanna be involved
in editing a bunch of video
but not necessarily reading a bunch of psych papers
and having discussions about what was going
to fundamentally appeal to different types of people
who were hypothesizing the existence of
from internet message boards and whatever.
So yeah, so I guess that's initiative number six
is a media group.
These ashes were once the tree at the center of the world.
The roots holding together the mountains,
the branches upholding the sky.
Okay, so here is very roughly speaking the plan.
Here's how all this is gonna work.
I would encourage, well, first of all, let me say
that I have been actually combing through the deep,
the depths of my neglected email
and actually getting back to all the people
who wrote me something substantial
that I really did intend to respond to
that I happened to receive
while I was just in too much medical crisis to do so,
whether that was before or after my transplant.
So I'm in the process of catching up on a bunch of email
and there are certainly a bunch of people
who I have had correspondences with
who I would like to invite into this process directly.
So I will make a huge effort to do so
and I would just say,
if you're somebody who has had some
formal correspondence with me in the past,
please do just write to me
if you wanna be involved in this.
Just don't at all hesitate
because I don't reach out or anything like that
is what I'm trying to say.
And then likewise, I would just encourage all listeners
at this point to send me emails with their thoughts
and indicating any interest in any of these projects
or all of them or of course there's gonna be some need
for just sort of like general,
some coordinating roles, right?
Just some like administration,
logistics, infrastructure, that kind of thing.
The general theory is that we will release
for each initiative,
we will develop kind of a skeleton crew at the outset
and release some form of media or something,
whether that's a distinct project
from fight like an animal
or whether it's a fight like an animal episode
where it's the project is described in some detail
and we have prepared at least some kind of like
initial specimen of the sort of work we're going to be doing.
And that would be the point at which we were kind of
formally soliciting engagement in the project.
And by the, so this will hopefully occur,
it's late August right now,
this will hopefully occur over the course
of the next four months so that by the end of the year,
every project will have been officially launched
and will have had people in it.
And that will have been the case for long enough.
Maybe we'll say that hopefully that'll be done
by mid-November or at the latest,
the beginning of December.
And then we could spend that last month of the year
putting together some kind of overall like a synthesis
presentation of the project overall
that could be used for instance
to present to potential funders and things like that.
And so the only one of these projects
for which we currently have that
is the embodied political cognition collective.
So like I said, MetaNoya will be episode one
will be released at the end of this week
or something like that.
That's probably a meaningless statement
from your perspective.
But before August is over, let's say,
at which point, we will have something sufficiently developed
to kind of formally declare to the world,
this is what this is if you would like to participate.
I mean, there's going to be other aspects of that project.
Like I said, there's a scientific research element
and an intention to ultimately attempt
to experiment with protocols
for affecting people's perceptions in various ways.
And trying to identify all the salient variables,
the material conditions, the narrative exposure,
the relational, the social relational realities,
the whole damn thing.
But we'll have enough to say,
here's what we're doing.
Come join us if you want on some level.
It'll feel like a real project with some real momentum.
And so I really am relying on the very fact of this podcast.
I feel empowered to initiate this project
and don't feel, there are other times in my life
where this would have felt like a ridiculous undertaking,
but I feel from the correspondences that I've had
that there really are a very significant number of people
who would be absolutely perfect for engagement
in this project,
who I have the ability to communicate with right now.
So I'm kind of operating under the assumption,
I think it's a good initial working theory
to at least test that this podcast and Metanoia
are good psychological filters or frames
for engaging the right kind of people
to become part of this world tree project.
So I'm not really gonna say it's like an actual application,
I guess.
I mean, I don't know, maybe it'll turn out to be,
but I would like to ask people who are interested
in participating in a significant way
to fill out something that is very much like an application
because we're going to use that as a means
of collecting our initial data set
that we're going to use to kind of generate some hypotheses
about the kinds of people who work well
with one another doing certain kinds of politics, right?
And so the application will have,
or whatever you want the questionnaire,
however you want to think about it,
will have a number of questions
that I have been coming up with on my own,
but it will also have some just existing psychometrics
that I think are pretty conceivably predictive
of some of the tendencies
that I have consistently observed in political organizing
to be disruptive or to generate cohesion.
And so yeah, it'll be essentially a chance for me
and the Meta Group to sort of like test
and refine hypotheses about what generates group cohesion
in groups dedicated to what kinds of political projects.
And then, you know, fill out the questionnaire,
put your data into, you know, some spreadsheets
for the Meta Group's work
and you'll get access to an online collaborative workspace
that at least for the time being we're going to use.
And there's, you know, big to-do lists
and in some cases documents with, you know,
some work already being done for each of these,
for each of these initiatives
and we can start having,
I imagine that every one of these initiatives
will at least at the outset have at a minimum
a weekly Zoom call that'd probably be
what you'd be committing to if you wanted to,
you could obviously participate in these groups
without necessarily wielding much decision-making power,
right, if you just wanted to help do work.
But if you wanted to be able to influence decisions
we made as a group, you'd probably be committing
to a Zoom call a week, at least for a little while,
right, until we figure out what is a good working style
and tempo for any of these given initiatives.
We will talk about decision-making protocols
that we like for each group.
In the Meta Group working space,
I'm conceiving and probably proposing
some decision-making processes,
but this is definitely oriented
towards a pretty radically egalitarian,
definitely spending a lot of time thinking
about power dynamics
and how to legitimately distribute power
throughout the group.
Once people are involved, right,
it's elitist in the sense that
we're definitely not trying to involve everybody,
but the notion is that we're trying
to be very selective about who we integrate into the work
because we think that we can cohere a group of people
who have a sufficiently shared vision
and sufficiently compatible temperament
that we can really not have to play
a bunch of stupid power games.
And so, you know, for instance,
my collaborator, Tanner Millen,
who has really helped me so much
in getting this whole thing off the ground,
you know, I'm making sure he's going to be kind of the
bottom-liner of the Metanoia podcast,
and I'm making sure that he just kind of has the ability
to do all the uploads,
make all the final editorial decisions,
you know, stuff like that.
I will emphatically not be the dictator
of any of these projects
other than fight like an animal,
but we will also emphatically not have the kinds of,
you know, inane death spiral conversations
that so frequently characterize political organizing.
We just won't.
Yeah, so that's kind of how one would engage
with this work at this point.
I encourage, I'm gonna go back to,
because I am finally doing such a good job
of going through all my old emails.
I stopped saying I encourage correspondence
of all varieties a while ago
because I just felt too ashamed of all the emails
I hadn't gotten back to.
I still have been corresponding with a lot of people.
It just really kind of depends on whether
the initial email came in
when I was too sick to respond or not,
but I'm gonna go back to saying
that I encourage correspondence of all varieties
and I'm gonna go ahead and say, you know,
write to me at any point
if you have any thoughts about this project at all
or if you wanna indicate your interest
in participating in any particular one
or all of these efforts or however, you know,
whatever the case might be.
And I will fairly shortly
to whoever does get in touch at this stage of the process
get back to you with, let's call it an application
just for kicks with an application
and thereafter give you a way
to access our online workspace.
And then in the case of each of these initiatives
there will be some more formal substantive announcement
where a great deal more detail
about the nature of the project will be revealed
as well as some kind of definitive testament
to the kind of work we're doing
granting that in some cases
there will be a significant diversity of work
but there'll be a testament to at least one
of the kinds of things we'll be doing
and another perhaps more formal call
like us in some sense for participation, you know
at which point you could email then.
Oh right, I should mention real quickly
that I certainly am in the very short term
otherwise I'm just gonna end up doing it myself
looking for somebody to help me build a website, you know
but if worse comes to worse
there's gonna be a website that looks
like I made it pretty soon.
I guess the thing that I would mention before I go
is that I do wanna say
I should be explicit about this
that I really think there's interesting things
we can do without a budget
that are totally worth pursuing
and that I am gonna give all my time to
like I already am
and would totally encourage other people
to dedicate their time to as well
but there really is only so much we can do without money
and I am trying to get money
and so I will say that this is a project
that's conceived with the understanding
that one of the reasons that the world is the way
that it is is that the only think tanks out there
are right wing and liberal, right?
And that this kind of work that we're talking about
just really doesn't get funded.
It just really doesn't.
The like, you know
it kind of really is the case
that the landscape of like podcasts
and stuff like that has changed that to some extent
but I think that there's a real need for
Yeah, like a kind of more rigorous research approach
than we would typically associate with podcasts
and things like that
that still just really doesn't
that that performs the role of think tanks
that we just don't see funded very often
and so I am encouraging people to participate
who are excited about this work
and who find the way that fight like an animal
conceives of the global crisis that we are in
and the kinds of information that like the sorts of variables
that I identify as salient
who I wanna encourage people who find that compelling
to engage with this project
but in particular people who feel like they need
to find a way to do some kind of work like this
that allows them to survive like should get in touch
and try to help me make this as
I don't wanna do that exploitative thing
that happens so often with nonprofits
that's like, yeah, do a bunch of work for free
and then someday maybe you'll get paid or something
I just really have to acknowledge
I don't know that we'll get funding
but I have reasonable strategies
for at least it's worth trying
and yeah, I want to hopefully develop
some physical infrastructure out here around Portland
and in the surrounding area
where people could conceivably come be for a while
indefinitely forever and work on this stuff with me
I would mention offhand right now
I'm in a two bedroom apartment alone
and I know that I'm probably gonna receive some visits
from collaborators and there's some tentative plans
to that effect already
but it's certainly the case that I would invite
the possibility of people who wanna put a significant time
into doing this work to come actually just hang out
with me here and likewise I'm really trying to
and when I say trying to, I'm actually having
at least somewhat tangible conversations
with people who actually have some access to resources
about creating some kind of network of
like a couple spots in the city
and a couple spots in the country
something to that effect
and so yeah, it'd be really nice to have this project
be in terms of the personal lives of the people
who toil day after day on it
be an antidote to the meaningless fragmentation
and atomization and blah, blah, blah
of the techno dystopian society that we inhabit.
So yeah, I really do conceive of this fundamentally
as an attempt at ethnogenesis.
It sounds more fun to be together
and try to survive than it does to be alone
and wait to die, right?
Then one night as we surrounded it
and worshiped the God who hung from this tree
spoke and said, fire, fire, fire, fire, fire, fire, fire,
fire, fire, fire, fire, fire, fire.