Title: Metamorphosis pt 3 2 Integration Across Landscapes and Brain Regions
Episode #: 65
Episode ID: 13080955
Source: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/13080955-metamorphosis-pt-3-2-integration-across-landscapes-and-brain-regions.mp3
------------------------------------------------------------

=== EPISODE METADATA ===
Generated: 2026-01-12 01:02:06
Episode ID: 13434582
MP3 File: 13434582-social-cohesion-vs-the-internet-vs-the-establishment-vs-the-earth.mp3
Title: Social Cohesion vs. the Internet vs. the Establishment vs. the Earth
Podcast/Artist: Against the Internet
Album/Series: Fight Like An Animal
Source URL: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/13434582-social-cohesion-vs-the-internet-vs-the-establishment-vs-the-earth.mp3
========================
What is the highest technique you hope to achieve?
You have no technique.
Very good.
What are your thoughts when facing the point?
They don't matter.
Greetings friends, I'm Arnold Schroeder, and this is Fight Like an Animal.
Find episode bibliographies and other texts related to this project at againsttheinternet.com
And if you want to support this work materially, please check out patreon.com slash biological singularity.
This was recorded a very long time ago, maybe four or five months at this point.
And I have no good reason for not releasing it sooner other than, you know, a general lack of executive function
and an obsessive nature that takes me on numerous diverging paths at any given moment that I don't necessarily anticipate
or have any capacity to plan for.
But here is part two of a conversation that I had with Daniel of what is politics quite a while ago.
It's interesting to look back.
There will be another episode that has already been recorded of Fight Like an Animal.
I don't know, I'll wait a few days, but it's done.
So I'll put it out soon.
In this episode, we kind of touch on, we describe a lot of issues and very broad outlines of very hypothetical projects
that in next episode, I'm going to try to talk about launching some concrete version of.
It is very interesting to me to listen to myself from this number of months ago.
I'm utterly horrified by the inordinate number of the word like that I use in the course of this dialogue.
But I definitely very much register to myself.
I don't know if it sounds like this to anybody else.
As somebody who still is kind of in the process of recovering from surgery
in a way that I don't feel well and all the complications in a way that I don't feel anymore.
So yeah, but it also the time went by that went by was sufficient for me to really not remember what we talked about.
And so even though there is some level on which I feel like a little awkward about my performance during kind of just like general affect during this conversation.
I also had sufficiently forgotten its content to be able to really listen to it while I was editing for the first time ish.
And I do think it's worthwhile.
I think people will get something out of it.
And like I said, it sets us up to talk about a whole lot of what we will talk about next episode, which will be soon.
And I will, I promise, get back to the metamorphosis series.
You know, it's the next thing on the list as if I follow the linear sequence of the list.
But you know, hopefully that means something.
Okay, friends.
But what one idea I had and I was talking with some I just want to make sure it's still recording yet on the comments is here's like an easy idea to like spread like these ideas.
It's just social clubs like make a hangout club, you know, just like a community center or whatever where you hang out this video games, have a drink, play some pool or whatever the fuck people like to do.
And okay, the core people who started are political and have political ideas.
And I guess to be like a member, you should have the similar ideas, but it's just a place to hang out.
And that just every movement comes out of some kind of social group, whether it's your religious group, or you're just family group or those reading groups that you're just talking about or whatever like some natural group or just some hangout club.
All those in the French Revolution, there's those, you know, all those little groups and clubs that became political parties.
Like, you can't have in our world today where everyone is so atomized with all the social media stuff and like one quarter of people, I forget what age and below have one friend or no friends.
One quarter of people have no close friends.
Like how fucked up is that so make and people want those friends so make the little social club.
You know, this is something anyone could do wherever you are, get a couple of buddies if you can find a space that you can rent out or that you have.
I don't know what your parents, I don't know, you know, I haven't thought it out clearly, but that's the locus and it'll take a direction.
But you have to put in the safeguards to make sure some maniac doesn't take it over and become the boss of it.
That you have to think about because all those tanky kids, like now if you go online on Reddit, those tanky kids have taken over every political thing except for the anarchist ones.
Like it's totally nuts.
And then on the anarchist ones, if you say the word stupid, I quoted Mark saying the idiocy of rural life and they're like, your post has been removed because you use slur words.
And I'm like, you fucking idiot.
Are you serious?
You can't say stupid or idiot.
And I'm like, don't you understand that if you're saying that the word idiot is a mentally disabled person, you're the one who's fucking like, whatever, discriminating against them.
And guess what's going to happen if you make the word special or disabled?
Guess what?
In 20 years, the word disabled is going to be the word retard.
What it is now, like that's the word is just going to take on that meaning.
And you're going to say, oh, you're disabled.
You're challenged.
And that's going to be like saying the fucking bad words today.
Like you can't do that.
You have to just say, well, this is a word that means people who are cognitively normal, but choose to be idiots that choose to be stupid.
Stupid is, it's like Forrest Gump says, stupid is as stupid does.
So you have a PhD in fucking brain science, but you're a fucking moron.
Like what's his face?
You know, the guy who was housing secretary in the US.
He's literally a brain surgeon that fucking bozo.
Oh, I don't know.
I forgot his name.
Anyways, whatever.
It doesn't matter.
Because the way to deal with all of that PC shit is recognize that the best word will take on the word silly used to mean noble and pure.
But people were just like, oh, he's silly.
Like he's so naive and foolish, you know, and then it takes on this new meaning.
So every word that's a nice word to describe people that you're going to make fun of is going to turn into a slur word in 10 years or 20 years.
So stop it.
Just drop that shit.
Use the words, but just use them in a way that, no, this doesn't mean, no, disabled, not every, I'm going to say, not every disabled person is a retard.
It's people who are normal, who cognitively normal, who have PhDs, but fucking vote for Donald Trump or, you know, that's, you know.
I'm not going to die on that hill and use that word all day, but I'm just saying get over it.
Stop it.
You can't just, the word idiot.
Yeah, because all those words mean the word retard.
Like the word idiot and moron, that's what the word retard was.
And the word retard, it came into being in order to be a nice word so as not to say moron an idiot, right?
Or imbecile, right?
But then that word became bad.
And it's like, the next word is going to become bad too.
Anyways, you don't have to put this in the video if you don't want.
Well, it also just feels like an expression of powerlessness where there's this thing where I feel like our society has changed.
You know, like you see these like trends where it's like this is exactly what you would expect if people with more egalitarian world views were able to change like language and certain aspects of our culture and like predominant representation.
And then people with more hierarchical world views owned all the big heavy things and had all the guns, right?
You know, where it's like...
That's exactly it.
That's exactly right.
In our fucking lifetimes, we've cycled through like...
Well, and if you extend that out a couple of decades, we've cycled through like three or four acceptable terms for black people, right?
Where their fucking conditions in the society in the United States of America have not...
The levels of poverty are the same and the levels of incarceration because they're worse for everybody are worse, right?
So like in terms of like...
It proved a lot for a while. Like if you go from the 30s to the 60s, it gets better and better and better and then it goes down and down and down.
But then from the civil rights movement to today, right? Like during the time of all those terminological changes, it's like the poverty level isn't better and like more people are on cages than ever before in the society with the same disproportionality.
And we become obsessed with nonsense with just the words.
What's crazy too, I'm not going to say the N-word, but when I was a kid...
Yeah, totally.
The N-word was becoming a word that was less and less.
It's one of the most vicious words that you could think of in the English language, right?
It's so degrading. It's such a like, you're an animal. Like that's what that is. That's what it means, right? You're not a person, you're a...
So that word is brutal.
But we get to the civil rights movement, we have like 20, 30 years of civil rights.
Then we get to the rap comes out and then you're just like N-word, N-word, N-word, N-word, N-word, N-word.
And guess what? It took the most brutal word in the English language and fucking mellowed it out.
It's still a bad word, but it mellowed it out.
And we're on the road to just like taking the sting out, taking this horrible word and just making it disappear.
And now they just made it worse. Everyone just decided to bring back...
We need this horrible word to be as horrible as possible.
We can't forget, we need to obsess on how bad it is and make sure that it hurts everyone as much as possible.
Don't let it not hurt you, you know what I'm saying?
Give it more power, give it more power.
It's evil, it's like the exact opposite of what you're supposed to be doing.
We're making progress and now we went backwards.
And it's exactly what you're saying, I never thought of it that way.
You have the people who can change language and culture are just doing that,
but then the people with the guns and stuff are just making everything else worse.
And it's just this tiny little corner.
I can control what's happening on Reddit and make Reddit a sort of supposedly better place
that I think is gonna help some person, like some person that doesn't even care.
And you know, if you talk to people with mental disabilities, guess what they say?
They say the R word. They say that shit.
If they're laughing at it, they think it's funny.
They're like, I'm not a retard, you're a retard.
Like that's all fucking time, dude.
And go to South Bronx. You know who says the N word?
Everybody, the white people say it.
Oh, totally.
Everyone's just saying it N word to each other all day.
Fucking get over, and they're, you know, it's better, it's better.
Like, take the sting out of these words.
Anyways, whatever.
Yeah, but no, it's exactly, it's like, it's like, there's this like right-wing talking point
that's been obsessively reiterated throughout the ages, which is like,
you guys have all the professors.
And I'm like, I don't know, like as I get teargassed in the street,
I'm not really sure that's the path to power y'all imagine it to be, right?
Like, yeah, we've got the anthropologists and the women's studies professors
and the world kind of looks like you would expect if everybody who was on our side,
you know, you can look at the ideological correlations
with different like occupations and social role specializations.
And it's like, you know, you guys have the fucking engineers and the business people
and the cops, right?
And the fucking lawyers and shit.
And yeah, and like, yeah, we have the humanities departments of like...
So you go to a fancy school, right?
And all the departments, well, there's two things to say, right?
It's because you have all these radicals,
but it's the most bullshit upside-down, pathetic, passive radicalism you could ever have, right?
It's not, you take radicals, it's like any hierarchical institution.
You get the church, which is this radical movement, anti-authoritarian movement.
You give it to Constantine and it becomes the crusades and fucking, you know, conquer the peasants.
But so there's that one thing too.
You get all this radical, you get feminism, you get socialism,
you get anti-racism, civil rights, everything.
You put it in a university and it becomes fucking dipshit nonsense, right?
But, oh fuck, I forgot what I was gonna say.
Wait, the people, oh yeah, you look at every department
and all the departments are all like supposedly radical, but like fake radical,
but except economics, zero.
There is no, they're fucking right wing as you can possibly be.
Like rent control is, like, it is, I was reading,
because you know, that's what I fucking see this every fucking day.
And rent control is a consensus of like 95% of economists
think rent control is terrible.
It's just, you can't be taken seriously if you think rent control is good.
And dude, I'm sorry, I understand the incentives of rent control
and there's total ways to make it work.
And even if it's the worst case, like, you know, in Stockholm
they have serious rent control
and it's a 30-year waiting list to get into the city.
And it's also because it's an island-type city, you know?
It's like San Francisco, it's an island-type city,
so you can't build more, you can't build more, you just can't.
It's just a finite supply, but you protect the tenants
and so there's, fuck it, my girlfriend like a million years ago
was on welfare and she was buying her unit in the building
because there was a right to first purchase by the tenants' law.
So whatever the owner was, sold the building and she bought it
and she was on welfare buying a fucking condo on welfare.
Fucking, so, but there's a third,
if you want to move into Stockholm, there's a 30-year waiting list.
Well, who cares? Great!
I don't fucking, you know what?
I maybe would like to move to Stockholm, but I don't have to.
The people in there, they don't have to fucking shit their pants
about being turfed out, like just today I had to fucking people crying
on the phone because they're getting evicted, you know?
And I can't, you know, anyways, whatever.
But it's like that's so much better, you know?
And you have all these laws and the places are well built
and the places, fuck you rent control is no good,
you fucking little shit, let me watch you be,
like what I want to do, like if I was Stalin,
if I had the crazy mad dictator power,
one thing I could do, like I would make laws for one year or two,
I would force everybody, rich people especially,
at the age of like 35, like when you're too fucking old for this shit,
to be forced to live off of a minimum wage humiliating job
for two years, that's instead of military service,
you have minimum fucking wage service.
You work for McDonald's, put George W. Bush,
put him in fucking McDonald's when he's 35 for two years,
those people, and you can't access your family money,
you have to take your wages and pay your fucking rent
and get evicted and get pushed out and be scared,
they'll become crazy Stalinists after that experience,
you know what I mean?
Like they've never been talked to the way your boss talks to you
at one of those jobs, they've never been talked to the way
a customer talks to you at those jobs
and you can't respond because you're in a servile position,
someone is fucking insulting you or sexually harassing you
and you just have to fucking sit there and take it,
they've never had to do that,
they've been shitting on everybody their whole life,
treating their nanny like shit, treating their teachers like shit.
Anyways, fantasy land, but that's...
Yeah, well, I mean, but I would even argue that it's like,
it's like economics, but it's also like,
I would just say any academic department
that deals with manipulating physical reality
or attaining real power,
so like engineering, right, you know,
and stuff like, even like, you know, biology,
like, you know, microbiology and like genetic engineering,
there's no like real ideological persuasion
to speak of there.
Yeah, yeah, it's pretty natural.
Everything has a right-wing skew.
And then, you know, like, law and business,
which, you know, which is like where fucking politicians come from, right,
heavy right-wing skew, you know, so it's like,
it's like, if you're gonna like do something that actually,
like, will you actually get to like manipulate
the corporeal world in some way?
And you get to do things, yeah.
And if you're just going to analyze the world,
you know, then there's like a left-wing skew
in those departments, but...
And you also learn, but whence,
it's like the discipline-minds thing, right,
and when you're in those academics departments,
they're all about knowledge and ideology
and not about anything real or very little that's real.
Because like, anthropology nowadays,
you want to get a job, you go work in advertising.
How do we get people in Madagascar to worry about being fat?
Or what's the country where it's Mauritania?
It's good to be fat.
Like, that's the prized woman is fat.
How do we make them neurotic about being fat?
Like, let's get some anthropologists.
Like, that's what you do if you want to make money
as an anthropologist.
Like, figure out this fucking new group of people
who just got, you know, cell phones or whatever,
just make them fucking get neurotic and anorexic and whatever.
But in...
Yeah, so the ideal...
The type of ideology that you have,
those people know how to sound radical
but not be a threat to anyone, you know?
And that's why they're so celebrated.
Like, that's why Foucault is so celebrated.
That's why Jude Butler is so celebrated.
Because no one could read what the fuck she's saying.
They are saying.
Right?
It's just gibberish.
And so there's no threat to anything.
Like, nobody cares.
It doesn't affect anything real.
The money is still going to come in.
In law, it's a bit different.
I don't know.
When I went to law school,
but it was a French law school,
I think it was more...
It was definitely conservative, bent.
It was like a trade school, right?
So you could be a crazy communist or like a Nazi
and no one would know
because you're just learning the laws.
There wasn't...
There was like two little...
Two philosophy of law courses.
It wasn't a big deal.
There wasn't that many places
where you would have these debates.
But in most elite fancier schools,
like if I've gone to McGill,
I think there's kind of some pretense
of being radical a bit.
Or pretent...
Not radical, but like being leftish.
But it's just...
But the corporate law is where all the money is.
The corporate law is where everyone's getting the jobs.
The corporate law runs kind of the show.
But I think when you get to those
more elite philosophical things,
because there's...
In McGill law,
there's more of a humanities element to it.
You're like...
It's like a humanities course.
You don't actually learn the laws there.
That's weird.
Like, so you're just learning philosophy
and writing papers and all this shit.
But where I went to,
which is also like an elite school,
it's different.
It's like trade school.
You're just like,
this is the laws about divorce.
This is the laws about this.
This is the laws about that.
And you're just learning laws.
And then those McGill kids
have worked like a dog.
And then when you have to do your bar exam,
they're starting from zero
because they barely learned any laws.
And they had to just learn them themselves.
But they've been trained
how to be such workhorses
that they can learn it all by themselves
at the end.
I don't know.
There's more ideology there.
I'm relying for that characterization
on that book,
Engineers of Jihad.
Oh, I don't know that.
The subtitle is
like the curious connection
between education and extremism.
And so on the one hand,
they're just talking about how
right wing terrorists
and Muslim terrorists
are overwhelmingly
misrepresented among...
like engineers are overwhelmingly...
Really?
Yeah, overrepresented.
Like, over...
like it's fuck,
you know, and canny.
But then, you know,
but then they go through
like just like breaking down
like a few different data sets.
And so some is like the more banal,
like a self-reported political identification
of people in different academic departments
aggregated over like whole nations
and stuff like that.
But then some of it's really juicy.
It's like professional specializations
of people in different like
types of terrorist group
and stuff like that,
like left-wing terrorists,
right-wing terrorists.
And that shit is fucking cool.
You would find it interesting
because it's like...
Okay.
Engineers are jihad.
Engineers are jihad.
It's pretty revealing, you know.
Because it is...
I don't know, like the one thing I would think of
and I don't know,
maybe it has nothing to do
with what that book is about,
but that you...
Oh, where's my fucking documents?
That you...
because you're a middle-class person
with an education,
you feel entitled
to a certain level of material rewards.
But when you're living in a society
and you're also attracted
to the ideology of anything,
like you're, you know,
because you're an educated person,
you like to read stuff.
So you like to read your Marxist Leninism,
or in that case,
it's the Muslim Brotherhood radicalism
and their kind of texts.
So it's known that
it's not poverty
that stimulates radicalism
or deprivation.
It's a sense of entitlement.
You think you deserve something
and it's being taken away from you.
And all of a sudden,
a passive person becomes an active person.
And rich people,
because they're always so entitled
and they think they deserve anything,
that's why they flip out
when anything happens.
Like, oh my God,
you have to share,
you have to go to school with black people.
You know,
or you're like,
oh, poor people,
poor people get in the school.
Like they get mad at everything
because they think they deserve everything.
But poor people are so beaten down
and told that you're a piece of shit
that they don't think they deserve anything,
so they tend not to rebel.
But there's these middle-class people
who are like,
well, I got this education,
I know about the world
and I'm supposed to get a job at the end of this,
but I can't because my society is so fucked up.
And that was the thing in Russia, too.
A lot of these people were like,
middle-class people going down,
middle-class people not being able to rise up
in the bureaucracy.
There's no future for them.
So they feel entitled to more,
whereas a lot of the peasants were just like,
we can't do anything, you know,
until things,
there were things that set them off later.
They talk about that,
they talk about that thesis a lot
and they like control for it
and their results.
But apparently,
even if you look at,
there's still a very significant bias
if you look at other professional disciplines
that should be expected to generate similar incomes
or whatever,
it's like they're not heavily overrepresented,
they're underrepresented among Muslim terrorists,
but engineers are like...
So what is it about the engineers
that makes them the dudes that are doing this?
Or attracted to it?
You know, I think that the best,
the best, like, most concise way
that I can think to phrase it is that
I think there is something about that mind,
like the mindset of somebody
who is innately attracted.
I think that we have to assume that there's
psychological variation
that tends to compel one to self-select
into roughly speaking
similar disciplines in terms of
the economic benefit or whatever,
to become an engineer rather than...
And that that psychologist
has a tendency to hyper-schematize
the world and to want to think of it
as a system that can be manipulated
without a lot of empathy involved,
to think in pretty clinical terms
about manipulating society towards certain ends
without really having a lot of feeling
about what happens to actual flesh and blood people
when you make certain manipulations.
That's my thesis,
and to some extent the authors,
but that's more specifically
what I got out of the book than what they say.
Super interesting.
But yeah, I don't know,
in terms of what you were saying about
making space,
making a club or something,
creating some format
for social cohesion,
I've been having these conversations
with people recently
where I've literally
is political organizing possible anymore?
Do we have,
or at least if so,
what is the model?
Because I feel like there's basically
in modern-ish societies,
there's been basically two models.
There was a material conditions-based model
that went on at least through
sometime after World War II,
where it's organizing workplaces
and organizing,
but it's like you had all this social cohesion.
The civil rights movement or whatever
is based on church groups
like identity based on geographic proximity
or membership
and some sort of
social formation
that was local.
All those people had so many social groups
that they were a part of.
It's your men's dudes club,
there's all those men's clubs
and women's clubs
and church benevolent clubs
and there are these weird associations
I don't even know what they were for
and in Jewish stuff,
this guy from Brooklyn was from the Caribbean too
and you had your funeral association,
your debt.
This has had all these organizations
without the state.
They had these charities
and insurance, you'd buy workers' comp insurance,
just the Jewish workers' comp insurance club
and stuff like that.
And those all came out of the synagogue
or whatever social club that you were a part of.
Exactly.
And so the question for political organizers
during that phase
of life in affluent,
industrialized societies
and not how do we create social cohesion,
it's how do we mobilize existing
configurations
of social cohesion.
It's like you get the reverend
or you get the dude
who's the president of the union or whatever
but it's like there's people to go talk to.
You just have to meet the right couple people
who haven't in with whatever group
and so that was that whole model
and then as
authors like Putnam have
discussed in books like Bowling Alone
you know it's like
that really started to decline
after World War II or whenever
but you know like at some point we got into this phase
of kind of like hyper-material
abundance relatively speaking
even if there was still like significant deprivation
there was like
starting to be enough abundance in the society
at large that even really poor
like people facing great scarcity
still had like television to zone out to
or whatever right like a lot more
sort of like immediate low effort reward
stimuli are being
you don't need the groups
because just think about
you have no TV you have no
internet you wake up
and like it's not a work day or something
like what the fuck are you gonna do
like you need you can't turn on
a podcast you know you can't do
you know like I go through my day
I see people and stuff like you know but there's days where I'm working a lot
at home I'm doing stuff and if there's no podcast
if there's no nothing like that
you're just alone in your head
you're supposed to have people in your house
you're supposed to have neighbors coming in and out
you know and there's there was the bar
that I was hanging out like before COVID
changed the whole thing but yeah it was just this place
that you just go it was like cheers
you know but it's like a more like
musicians or whatever weirdos cheers
you know and there's just some people don't like you
you don't like some people but you're still part
of your community you kind of like them anyways
if you think about it you actually like them
even if you fucking hate them you know
and everybody's there and there's that weird guy
and that one and it's just a place and then
things happen you know you get
yeah if somebody needs something all of a sudden
people are raising money amongst each other
oh you need money oh shall let's have fun
that sucks you know exactly
but people are starving for that stuff
so there's I think that's
and that's the key like I've been having
these conversations where you know
it's like I feel like
I feel like for whatever reason people
with very different world views
much earlier than us
decided to like really like examine
human psychology and be like
what do people need let's like
let's try to meet psychological needs
right you know it's like you have like
Edward Bernays you know using Freudian
psychology to sell people like
consumerism and
patriotism or evil
like you have like using the brilliance
for evil yeah exactly evil mother fucker
what a brilliant guy but like just for garbage
wasting his talents oh fuck yeah
totally but then you just like
kind of hard to find stuff like that
like equivalents you know but like
I feel like what we have to offer
is like a group identity
right is like a sense of like social
cohesion that people desperately desperately
need and then you have this kind
of like post materialist phase of
organizing or whatever where it's like
there's you know like
it's hard it's getting harder and harder
to like organize on the basis of
like geography or like group
identity like you all live in this one town
you're all like hanging out at the
Grand Hall or whatever but you know starting
in the 60s especially you have counter
culture and you have like people
self-selecting into like these different
little cultural niches based on like
their unique psychologies or whatever
so you still have this ability
to like kind of like be like hey
like let's come be this come be this
group come be like have this identity
like earth first was my political home
when I was young and it was very much an identity
right it was like it was like come
home to these people you know it was like
you're like very much part of a family
you know and
but that model was predicated
on two things that I think
have like gone away one was
that there was just more surplus
in our society it was way easier to be
like I'm gonna pay my $200
rent by like yeah yeah
trim and weed fucking one day
a year I'm gonna work 15 hours
a week and then I'm gonna be poor and I'm gonna
do all these things and otherwise
I'm just I'm earth first 24 hours a day
or whatever it was right you know it's like
so it's like we have these organizing models that were
kind of based on counterculture and you
definitely would see this divide like normal working
people kind of couldn't be part of some of these
movements in the same ways you know like
like the stuff that I did was very much not
like what people did after work
it was like you devoted your life to it
you like went and lived in some weird national
forest or whatever you know but that was
possible you wouldn't have the energy to do any of that
if you were had a job too you'd be coming home
exactly exactly
so it's like we had that we just had more
of them there was more of a margin you know
counterculture is predicated on there being a margin
to inhabit but then also we just
didn't have all this like digital reward
stimulus everywhere all this fucking
crack that we now are all
smoking you know that has
done more I mean like
you know when they collected data in like the
70s and 80s the biggest predictor
of somebody isolating from other people
was watching television
right and it used to be that among
like counterculture types or whatever
there was this real like you would go to houses
where there were no TVs you know and like
there was this very conscious distinction
we don't do that that's poison and now
I don't know who to find like I
never met anybody these days
who's like yeah I never watch like
I never hang out just zoning out
on streaming video on whatever device
I'm addicted to you know I know one
dude he's the total freak
but yeah I mean it's like
although even him even him he doesn't
have internet he doesn't have a cell phone
I don't have a cell phone either but he goes
and down finds music I don't know where he gets it though
maybe the library but he watches like
shows like he'll watch like a zillion episodes
of welcome back Carter or whatever
right
people I knew who like
20 30 years ago like built
little cabins out in the woods and we're like
yo fuck civilization
full stop now just have like
giant like 52 inch screen
TV's in their little cabins
in the woods you know and they're like
witching about it
or whatever like you have you heard this
conspiracy and I'm like
this is so it's brutal
but
but see but that there's a potential
that's the thing though I feel like
we're just you know the internet when did it really
take off like in the late 90s like
to let's say the year 2000 really when like everyone
started having internet yes it's only been
oh go ahead
well it's only been like 20 years
25 years of really
internet society so just
imagine like when the printing press first came out
like 25 years is nothing we're just
figuring out like right now
everyone's committing suicide all the girls are committing
suicide everybody's becoming anorexic
everybody's like all fucked up and all these
dumb identities and everybody's fucking
cancelling each other and losing their fucking lines online
and and dooming and glooming
but it's because it's the first
25 years like I don't know
but I'm guessing I see some people a bit
younger than me who at
points when I was like super on social media
they're like yeah I don't I check it once
a day I don't look at
and I know if you know and I was like oh they're developing
better habits you know because
they've had it longer and they're just like oh this makes me
sick I'm not going to do this anymore
whereas people older were actually
worse at it somehow and
so I'm get I'm hoping anyways I don't know
that younger people
younger people are now are super super fucked
but I feel like there's like a next generation
afterwards that's going to be like yeah
we like we know how to
you know consume this in a way
that's not um super
crack you know I don't know
or maybe it's just like cracking you just have to get it away
maybe you need to pass laws to ban everything
I don't know I know I kind
of agree like and even more
broadly speaking I feel like
there's this real argument to be made I feel like
I feel like it's easy to be like okay the internet
just kind of ended everything and everything is totally
fucked now but there's also like this
whole thing where I just feel like
there's this really there is this
sense in which we have to look at what
the internet actually did to society
and acknowledge that it actually
like achieved some of like
these important sort of like
preconditions for a revolutionary
like situation that we would want
like it totally negated
like one thing that I think is really
under-emphasized is that it basically has
negated people's sense of
like inner group threat psychology based on
like national identity and stuff like that
like it used to be like the fact
that in America there's like this big right
left split on how to deal with Russia
whereas that used to be like this cohesive
like oh we all just have to hit everybody
against Russia and the fucking
Republicans like you know and now it's
like it's more based on like well
is the Russian regime
like doing something that like actually
appeals to your psychology and your
politics and so it's like
it's actually about something it's like no
longer the case that you can just invoke the
foreigner and it's like that's enough to
like impose authoritarianism
and like create this like cohesive sort
of like national fucking response
that negates the possibility of any real
politics happening
and it's like we haven't done
a good job so far right
like yeah because it's based
on shit that's not real like people are supporting
or against Putin based on nonsense
right but it's
but it's still not the enemy
is bad because sometimes the Republicans
are for the foreigners
sometimes the Democrats are for the foreigners
different foreigners but like yeah you're right
there's not that same chauvinism immediate
like yeah America's better
and the other thing that seems
like it's really like this is like this
essential thing that like when the internet
came around and I was like 14
like a 14 year old hacker I was super like
yo this is gonna change everything
in a way that it did where it like
pretty much everybody like oppositional
to the fucking
dominant institutions right like
like whatever crazy
shit people think everybody
is pretty much unified in an understanding
that the status quo
is fucked right and so it's
like
you'd be surprised there's definitely
a liberal internet you know like I know
that exists but you know there's a lot
of those people but yeah but no no you're
right and there's just like a huge
mobilization of different perspectives
that are all like unified at least
in that in a way that did not used to be
the case and another thing
to so in general right in any
society that has a rebellion
or social change or achieving rights
like civil rights movement women's rights
like anything it's always based on
communications whether
like the women got their rights all in
World War one most of the women around
and World War two because the men were away
the women were all suddenly instead of being
isolated in their separate homes as housewives
they're all working together like they got jobs
all of a sudden they're working together in the factories
and it's like Marx was saying with the proletarians
they're all in one place they're all getting to know each other
they're all like hey this sucks that sucks
why can't I vote why can't I this and look at this
I'm doing all the work at home and
in the fucking job you know oh this is what
my husband does all day this was all the
this is why he's so special and deserves all his rights
guess what asshole I'm doing this and
I'm going home and feeding the kids and I'm fucking this
so they're like and they're connecting
with all of each other so they were
ready to push for their rights
and then the men kind of realize
that oh wow you did do all that stuff
you know I and my wife
is like ready to fucking rumble and she's got all her
friends too and
I recognized like oh yeah you held
the shit together so you I have more respect for
you now so that they got their rights
and in any Haitian why did the Haitians
have a revolution even though it turned
fucked up and the American black people didn't
right because American black people were
separated on plantations where they're
only such social network with the other slaves
were like you know between 10
and 20 maybe a hundred max
other people whereas in Haiti
the the masters didn't care what you did
at night and so they all had these
cultural dancing
stuff like this dance stuff
at night and they would stay up all night
and dance and those dance
created networks across the entire island
so people on one side of the island
could be able to communicate about what was happening
on the other side of the island so that's how
they're able to organize and connect so now
we went from the printing press which
could completely transform society like if you
think of all the you know the
Protestant
Catholic split and then the enlightenment
and all that stuff just comes straight out of the
printing press like the middle ages just kind of
broken in half because the printing press
well now we have the internet and it seems
like it's making everyone stupid and insane
and I think it is right now but it has
that potential that is amazing and I see
you're pointing out I never thought of that, that is very true
and the some stuff that I do see
is when I was a kid
and learning about radical politics
I didn't know anyone else
who had those politics barely
I knew a few people but it was like
hardly you know it was
far and wide and then the quality
of discourse
that you had among the people
in the know was so much
lower like you had Noam Chomsky
you had like Michael Parenti
I don't know who you had you had a couple of dudes
and you know running around Amy Goodman
they would go on that show that was the only show
and because you only had three dudes
running around and Amy Goodman with the only
TV show
just there wasn't that much
like these are bright guys you know
Noam Chomsky is brilliant but
now you have so many
bozos like look at Chapo, Trappos or whatever
these are bozos like
Matt Christmas like the guys fucking
brilliant but it's just fucking bozos from their basement
and their level of
being sharp and being able to
analyze or they feel like you know the young Turks
or whatever like that guy
Jank Juger
like whatever that's just you know
it's too commercial for me but he's
able to point out oh yeah the Democrats
are paid to lose they get those
donations so that they can be the weak opposition
to the Republicans the Republicans are the Harlem Gold Trotters
they're there to win
and the Democrats are the Washington Generals
who are there just for show
to lose and you select your donors give money
to the losers and not the like and
that's such a you know Chomsky never said that
this bozo Jank Juger said that
so the discourse
among the people in the know like the 3%
of people who are super hyper political sliced
okay it's full of fake news and Stalin
never did anything wrong on all this crazy shit
but there's a level of awareness
of knowledge like when I was 15
and I was reading books in the library because
just whatever happened to be in the library versus
these fucking crazy 15 year olds now who have
access to like every fucking book in every script
you know their level
of knowledge is high
level of being able to see through
it there's a lot of falling
for a lot of shit but there's also
being able to see through shit like the way
that all that dumb woke shit was like
like the PC shit
was taking over but now you start to see
the reaction against it and so we're starting
to be able to see oh
this is just right wing crap in left
wing disguise like being able to
articulate these things see through them
I feel like we're like
transcending the fucking chaos
and stupidity and then
the potential
of making the internet an actual
social place and information place
instead of a fucking idiot factory
is there and it might be
realized the potential is there anyways
like you know we don't know where it's gonna go
you know is it just gonna make us all fucking
I don't know in my last video I said something
like nowadays we spend much of our lives on the internet
in the picture of some dude wearing like a virtual
reality thing and he's having sex with
like this it's like a mannequin
but with no arms and no legs it just
looks so fucking pathetic that
is that gonna be society maybe we're all gonna be
that fucking pathetic dude in his socks
you know fucking this mannequin
or are we transcending
all that crack and are we gonna
use the potential of the internet
to connect with other people and when
people connect that's when change happens
when the peasant starts to connect with
the city people and the peasant starts to connect with each other
you know it didn't take off because
they didn't have enough time but that's
what happened you know stuff happened so
I have hope like you like I see that
yeah exactly and I think that there's this really
strong case to be made where it's like
okay everybody got on the internet
because honestly it's like there's two different
phases of the dynamics where it's like sure
the internet like showed up in the 90s
but you really see this like sharp
change in society's vital statistics
like right around like 2010
1112 when cell phones
like smart phones and social
media really became like 100% saturation
you know and that's
like you know you see everything like
teenage girls depression rates like
the like sudden decline and how much
people interact like all that stuff starts
happening but you also fucking get the air
of spring and you also get occupied
you also right and so it's just like how
the printing press and then
literacy like widespread literacy a
little later on you know created like
first like the Protestant reformation all that
and then like all those revolutions of like
the enlightenment yeah you know it's like
and the enlightenment exactly
yeah you know it's like you have that same thing
where suddenly there's this like oppositional politics
that becomes possible and it's like
I think there's a strong argument to be made
that like everybody got on the internet
and it's not like
it's like our world views like we came
on to the internet with the world views that we have
so we were able to navigate every
fucking moron who
claimed some kind of leftist politics or whatever
who was just like an insane
idiot and be like oh yeah
okay well there's insane idiots everywhere
but that's not me but it's like it's not
exactly surprising
like I would have to say that it's like we
didn't maybe have like a great
sort of like set of materials ready
made for everybody it's like
we weren't making the best argument out
the gate right you know it's like
I mean that like
egalitarian politics ecological politics
just didn't have like a great
presence that I would say
would like successfully
sort of like make
countervailing points to all the other arguments
that people were likely to encounter
you know and was like very much associated
with some very like annoying tendencies
right but there's something like there's
like this simple thing where it's like but maybe
we could get it right you know like
maybe it's like like you said it's like so
early on in the process and so it's like sure
chaos ensues but like maybe
we could just do a good fucking job
and you know and like I so I
like I really believe in projects
like yours and mine and like
I see all these people doing this amazing
stuff where I'm like I don't know
it feels like it feels like this stuff
does have potential like like the story of the internet
has yet to be written you know
just barely started and I love
listening to liberals freak out because
they're realizing that they don't have hegemony
over like discorsant or like
over narrative anymore you know
where I'm like nope you sure don't
like it could go it's anybody's
game now like maybe the people who believe
in the lizard people are going to win
or maybe will win but it's
definitely not going to be you just because you have the New
York Times on your side or whatever
yeah yeah you've lost it and those
New York Times I mean the New York Times
is a little bit but those papers are also becoming
idiot social media inspired
like partisan hackery too
it's crazy how everything's just gone in the toilet
in that way but you know it's I don't know
but like another thing
too like memes like
the quality of me you can there's so many
memes now that capture
an idea so
perfectly like and so funny
whether it's stupid humor but political
ideas you're just really there's
one dude I think called cursed
cancellations it's like some radical
queer dudes or people who
who just got so fed up
with everybody cancelling each other and
fucking destroying each other's lives and now there's sort
of a movement in that space
of like fuck all this cancel shit but these are the
cancel peep like this is where cancel
culture originated from right like
crazy total marginal freaks
who are like I'm taking my
space you don't call me this one word you call
me this word and I'm fucking owning
it and that was cool because these were like the most
marginalized poor oppressed people that you see
sexually abused people and they're fucking
owning their space and it's fucking intense to
be around them but you respected them
and then it went into the university and turned into this
fucking nonsense where you can't say that
rural idiocy of rural life because you get
fucking banned for it so
there's now a whole
generation of kids and I see it a lot
too in the people the younger kids I know who are
in these scenes they're like I fucking hate
all this cancel shit and they're all total crazy freaks
like you know they look like the
caricature of the person who's
the PC person who's gonna like you know
get you in trouble and they're like fuck
this cancel shit anyways they have
these meet like cursed cancellations
they just encapsulate so perfectly
the idiocy whether it's in your radical
group of people canceling each other
or people on TV or the stupid woman
who's in the military talking about
pretending to be oppressed
anyways there's so much
great stuff in memes whether it's stupid memes
even those dumb right-wingers sometimes
get memes that there's just so much intelligence
and piff you can really capture
something in it and there's something
this is like an old thing already but
remember it was like I'm
not racist but you know like there's
this whole thing about that don't be that
guy who says I'm not racist but
because when you say that you're about to say some
racist shit right and that's
good like that it's like raising
your awareness oh am I that guy
like oh I you know there's
these guys there's these types
you know am I one of these types maybe I should think twice
about being these types or maybe it's okay to be one
of these types like I don't know it's like there's
so much there's so much intelligence
and wisdom out there it's in a sea
of caca and stupidity but it's like
I don't know I see a lot
of potential you know what I mean no it's
true it's like there's these kids
who at the age of like 14
have way more of a political education
than I did because even though I read a
lot of books it's like whole political arguments
get reduced to literally fucking
memes you know and it's like yes
and it's good and they're good how to actually
do it and so they like really do understand
you know and it's like it's amazing
you know I try to make some
memes that I'm like so clunky at it I have
no like I'm obviously from like the
1970s or 80s or whatever like
I try to make a meme and I'm like it's
so clunky and then you see some kids fucking
whipping off these garbage drawings
it's fucking brilliant yeah
I mean yeah it seems
like I don't know but like basically
it kind of seems like
like there's this big lesson that you can take
from like cross-cultural anthropology
cross-species biology which is like
you either need
a lot of social cohesion
or you need massive escape potential
like you either need like the capacity
for like rapid
like ready you know like readily
available social disaggregation
like you need to just be able to get the fuck away
from whatever situation you're in or whatever
relationship you have and just do something
else right or you need
like this level of cohesion where
people where nobody can dominate a
group individually because everybody
like has each other's backs on some
fundamental level yeah so you see
that like you see that like
you know like in like
the primate record right it's like
bonobos are as they are
because females can stick
together they just have a different habitat
females can stick together so a dude can't
do what like male chimpanzees
like especially eastern chimpanzees do
right you know because they'll all boot
them up and so this whole different kind of
society forms and you can see that like
in the course of the scarcity of
people keep saying oh
density of resources equals hierarchy
but if you look at the bonobos and the chimpanzees
it's the exact opposite the
bonobos have the density of resources
which allows coalitions
of women to assert themselves
and join forces just like in the immediate
return hunter gatherers groups why do
women have so much power because they form their coalition
right and then the chimpanzees
have scarcity of resources and that
allows men to dominate women because
men are bigger than the women especially in those
and their species so yeah it's
the exact opposite right and everybody has to
vision off in order to like find
their own little piece of like foraging
habitat yeah but it's also
like it just seems like
like the variables end up
being like so sensitive to these
very like acute like
perturbations right you know where it's like
like these very like fine adjustments
will create different like like really different
outcomes it seems like where you know it's
like like well because it's like it
seems like concentrated resources
can be bad if they can be monopolized
somehow yeah yeah that's 100%
that's the thing right but
in the case of like bonobo habitat
they really can't be because it's actually
like it's like hyper abundant but it's also
like it's fairly dispersed you know so
it's like there's not like just
like one thing that somebody could like
guard or whatever you know and yeah and
yeah and you could hog you could
hog like a zillion bananas or whatever they
eat right but then there's other like
you're just why did you do that for there's just one
right here I'm just gonna get that one right and that's
yeah exactly and that's why
yeah I was really I found
it really interesting to read
stuff about like
comparing like New Guinea foragers
and agricultural
lists or like horticulturalist or whatever
where they're basically saying
that like the wild
versus cultivated distinction didn't really matter
in terms of social form it was just how
like dispersed you know like
if resources were like very concentrated
in one place in monopolizable
then whether they were whether it was like
they were just like fishing wild
fish or like collecting from
wild plants that were like very concentrated
these sort of like fixed social
relations would would
develop and then hierarchy would emerge from that
but but like if people were doing
like scattered cultivation or just kind of
like dispersed foraging then
like that kind of thing wouldn't happen
and I really wonder about like
I mean to me like the whole thing
that's like just like
to literally you know like talk
about our own situation in
in those terms like
I really think like maybe
I'm wrong but I've grown a lot
of food and I read a lot of like scary
scientific papers about like
the conditions of food production and like
it really seems like sometime this decade
I mean we started to see
the beginning of like a decline
in global food production in 2018
and like that had never
happened you know in like decades
proceeding and now we're really
getting into some scary territory
where it's like one of the places I'm from
is California Central Valley
and it's experiencing these conditions
that just are not good for food production
like the sky is blanketed by smoke
for like you know sometimes
like seriously six months at a time
when the harvest should be happening
and then it's getting flooded all winter and stuff like that
and like at some point I do
kind of think global food production is going to
like really be like a serious
fucking problem
like and the networks are so
taxed and they're so
like yeah
they're small disruptions can cause huge
chaos because we're so dependent on these giant
networks that are like like yeah
yeah and it's like that
that really brings up I mean
I could I could see it going all kinds
of different ways but it's like usually
if there's just like outright food scarcity
scarcity the social
conditions that result are bad
like there's just like it's like pretty hard
to build human solidarity
of any kind when people are fucking starving
you're fighting about food
I don't know of a single
and then like it's like
the countervailing forces
or whatever would be like if food
production became
if like the crisis actually
engendered some localization of food
production that could go all kinds of
ways that could be so interesting
well that's it well that's definitely
because if you
because you can't control
you know who Henry Kissinger said if you
control the food you control the people right
so these mass giant networks
of giant big agricultural food distribution
and whatever if you sort of transform
those into more localized ones
there's less locuses of power
to choke off and to control everybody with
so that could also be really good
but hopefully you can get there without
having a huge catastrophe
yeah
and that's the thing that's like
it's like people imagine
a thing I'm always trying to do
is like disabuse people of the notion
that for any given problem
there's like a room full of adults
who have power who are like earnestly trying
to figure it out you know and this is one of those things
where like there ain't nothing like that
there's no like there ain't no like senators
or like city council committees
or like at any scale
of like official power
nobody's sitting around being like yo what the fuck
are we gonna do like there's a lot of scientific papers
coming out saying the food system's about to collapse
like seriously like should we
think about that at all like there's literally
fucking nothing you know
we saw that with COVID right
because there have been
predictions with good reason
that there could be a global pandemic
like and global pandemics happen
we had one 100 years ago
and people knew there's gonna be one at some point
let's save and there were people writing
some stuff like oh here's some things that we can do
here's how we can plan but the incentives
of the political system are so corrupt
and so soaked in money that it's like
oh we can't have put aside money for that
we just gotta squeeze give all the tax cuts
to the rich people and squeeze every like you know
and we got whatever the scraps everybody else is fighting for
we don't have room for anything anything anything
so any little crisis that hits like with the trains
you know like the train systems
in the states there's that whole fucking that strike
and they're working people seven days a week
with a minimal fucking crew because they're too fucking cheap
these super profitable companies
are too fucking cheap to like
hire more workers they can easily like
double their workforce but no we gotta
keep making that profit and the whole fucking
you know all the supply chain can completely collapse
because these fucking lunatics
won't hire some more fucking people
like that's I don't know
and that's those are the time
and that's you see that from the Russian Revolution right
that the crisis there was
like World War one you know that was one of the big crisis
that just sort of sets off all this shit
so it could have some stupid little hopefully it's not
a horrible Earth destroying crisis
you know hopefully it's like a smallish crisis
but like yeah you saw in COVID that no one was
prepared for anything this is the mildest
kind of pandemic you could ever imagine
and everybody reacted in ways that were fucked up
and they didn't even build more
like okay why don't we build
a few more hospitals because now we'll have
every year like a certain amount of people die of
flu and some other people gotta die of COVID
maybe kind of an extra hospital for they can't
fucking can't do anything like in my where I live
in Quebec in Montreal we had
this amazing subway system built
in the 70s right like they
had money somehow to build
a fucking subway system out of nothing
there was nothing and there's a fucking
subway that goes all across the city
now you know 20 30
40 years later it took them
25 years to build three stops
they've been planning like if you when I
was a kid you'd look at the map of the stops
and they're like oh there's gonna be an extension and there's gonna be extra lines
they said they never built any of it
they built three fucking stops like every
20 years it's fucking insane because
there's no tax base and all that stuff anyways
if hopefully you have one little crisis
that will really shine
the light on stuff and hopefully
you get the idea you know like
if we can memify our politics
so that the average dude
working at McDonald's or working
wherever can just
grasp the obviousness
of the stupidity of our social hierarchy
and our economic system
when there's that crisis
it will create the demand for the correct
solutions versus
if everybody has their head up their ass
and believing in flat earth and who knows whatever
fucking nonsense and Bill Gates is putting
the bowl of virus or I don't know what the fuck
that's because that's what we're getting now right
the internet is giving us that now
when there's the crisis everyone is going to be
so fucking their head up their ass
and they're so fucking it's crazy
crazy shit too is you know 30 years ago
these would be believing left-wing stuff
now I'm looking at all these hippies on
Instagram and like you know people
into meditation they're all
pushing these right-wing fucking
sites and then they're pushing left-wing
sites because they can't tell the difference between
Marianne Williamson and fucking
whatever these weird anti
the rebel news like this
crazy right-wing shit and then
the conservative candidate is like this
all right kind of candidate they can't tell
the difference you know
so if we can memify our stuff
get it to filter out
into the ordinary person's vocabulary
which I think is possible is so obvious
it's so much more logical than everything else that's going around
when there's a crisis which hopefully isn't
the biggest crisis
people can have better instincts
and react better to what's going on
and the danger now is that
everyone's head is full of internet garbage
and when there's a crisis like you know
like there's that occupy came out of a crisis
but because it was all college kids
all stupid masturbation shit it kind
of like shot itself in the face
you know it could have accomplished something but now
we learn now we saw that let's let's learn our lesson
and let's you know have some
instincts to go forward so anyways that's
what I think about like what can I do
right now is if I can simplify
stuff simplify simplify simplify
simplify and somehow maybe other
people could because I'm not good at making memes if you can
turn what I'm doing if you're out there and you're a kid
you're 15 and you see what we're talking
make memes out of it I don't know make my
podcast into memes
I'm gonna make tick tocks you know
whatever anyways
yeah exactly but that's like
hmm I don't know I think it's like
it's some monster I think it's like
Thomas Friedman or somebody
yeah
one of his books he starts by
by saying
by pointing out that like the Chinese symbol
for crisis and opportunity is the same
or whatever you know and I'm like
fuck you but good point you know
yeah it is it is it's like
there's this sense that like
exactly like it's
it's so obvious and nobody
doesn't know that this is all gonna
come crashing down in some fashion or another
right that's like that's a universal
understand right
if you ask a poll I don't know what the
I've seen pull but if you just ask anybody
and look there's all sorts of TV show every TV
show is about a fucking zombie apocalypse
or some fucking shit everybody
knows and what's look how
intense that is we all
know but we don't know what to do about it
we have no idea oh the earth could be destroyed
like who
imagine imagine Jordan Peterson's
right and like all the environmental stuff is
fake or somehow but it doesn't matter
everyone totally believes
in general that there's gonna be some
calamity that we're heading for what
what are we doing about it nobody knows
how to do it nobody knows how to do
exactly exactly you know it's it's
such a dream like time to be alive
like I feel like I feel like
when it when everything does
reach a certain critical point we will
have seen so many movies about it
where we'll be like oh like New York
is getting destroyed like I've seen that
in like seven hundred block busters
20 times like and it's just gonna feel
weird it's just gonna feel like uncannily
like it's recapitulating the movies we've seen
but like I don't know
it's yeah it's it's really
interesting to be to be alive in this
time where it feels like I guess what
we're kind of hoping for
like like realistically is that
crises will come that are not
like negating
the capacity for like life on earth to
continue
they're like bad enough that the power
structure like falls apart
and there's like legitimate opportunity
but they're not quite so bad that
there's like no such thing as planting a seed
anymore you know and it's just
like that's like a fucking weird like
that's some weird shit to just be like
waiting around to like like hope
for whatever you know like
I don't know but yeah it does it feels
like mostly like ideally
any political interventions
any like work that somebody does
is kind of like durable across a wide range
of outcomes right like hopefully it like
is somehow focused on achieving something
tangible
in current conditions but also
would somehow be useful
even if it's just in that it created a network
or whatever for like some future
crisis or some you know where it's like
yeah yeah I really
it feels like
again to go back to like the Russian Revolution
it's like that was just a straight up
collapse right that was just like
like Russian history is just full of
like people like starting
wars that they can't finish and then
their society collapse and like that's
Russian history in a fucking nutshell
and it's like in whoever like happened
to be holding the best package
like the most like
decisively asserted or like most appealing
package of like shit that we could
implement in its you know
as an alternative like one
you know and it's like you just like kind of
want to think in those terms like how could we be like
holding a package of like
stuff that would ideally meet really immediate
human needs because I think that's going to be
like the biggest question is not like
what are the what are the philosophical
abstractions that your system
is based on but like do you have food
to give people and stuff like that
I think but I don't know
if I'm being a wanker but I do think you need
that undergirding foundation
of an abstraction
just the principle of
like hierarchy is dangerous and you have to
keep an eye on it and if you build
from there you'll make the right choices
you know and you know like next time
that like you know that there's an occupied
type right there's a crisis like occupying
that was a crisis that didn't destroy everything
and it created a big opportunity
just to occupy kids blew it
so what I would love is for
you know you get that knowledge disseminated
out there the kind of basic common
common sense becomes actual
sense instead of nonsense right
because now it's common nonsense let's say
you know if we can get the common sense to filter down
outside of the reddit bubble
and I do feel like a lot of it is slowly
getting out there but
yeah like the amount of people who question
capitalism today versus
when I was a kid
it was like it's enormous like even
though it's still a small percent it's like
a hundred times more than it was
when I was a kid that's fucking huge
and an average person
has a much more radical critique
than an average person had before
you know like I don't know
yeah
but yeah if there's
I don't know I don't have
great ideas for practical
what exactly needs to happen you know what I mean
like how do you get food out there
I don't have no idea I'm not
an expert in any of that stuff
I mean I've spent a lot of time trying to
like
get projects going that
are about some of those things
like projects that are based on
like one thing that I
tried to do at one point was just to
organize
geographically defined
just get people to any kind of
meeting like any kind of network in place
that was just based on the very
broad sort of like
should we prepare
for a collapse of some kind
that we all sort of see coming right
you know into like sort of like
use that as a foundation for doing
politics
and you know it's like but you know who is doing that
like the right wingers are doing that
like they have all those gun clubs and the NRA funds
like that's
churches but the NRA is purposely funds
and advertised like to build
these little clubs so that people join
the clubs and then people get indoctrinated
with the ideology of never
ban guns and everything and it creates this
social network like you know it creates this
an actual political mobilization that's
kind of started from the top and used
manipulated from the top but you can have
something like that that's not just used
as puppets for some big
you know thing yeah exactly
and it's like you know I mean like
I don't know I read
you know I read papers about like the food
production capacities
within a given like you know distance
to like different cities and stuff like that
and like I've tried
to like organize networks
of like food producers and landowners
to like you know engage
with people in cities and try to come up
with some kind of like set of contingency plans
for when shit falls apart
and like to try to build power around that
like I in that that work
is so it's like again this
thing of like I really think
that there's like a psychological need
for stuff like that and that people understand
that at some point
their survival is going to come down
to like being able to navigate some
system like that do I have
any ability to do that when I need to do
when these things aren't available to me
and what about I don't know this urban agriculture
there's all this rooftop this and
like are those sustainable things that you
can feed
serious numbers of people well yeah
and especially in fucking Portland and I
don't think it's I think this is kind of
common in a number of other cities it's like
the area that we have devoted
to golf courses is almost enough
to like fucking feed everybody
you know where it's like is that right
fucking crazy yeah and so I wanted to put
out these like policy documents
you know like about
like showing like potential food production
zones in the city that are just like converting
the fucking you know like
that's interesting yeah I
thought about I thought about doing just like a city council
run or something just to like fucking
you know just to like put out the propaganda
more than because I really want to be on the city council
but but you'd be surprised
how
I mean not to completely you know
make it into a joke but how easy it is
to do city council
stuff like if you have a social
network if you have a little bit of organization
like city council
is big stuff like it's
much easier to win some city council shit
than it is to win anything bigger than
that and there's a lot of stuff that you can do at
the city council level I mean it depends on the city
like where we are the cities don't have much
power but they still
like you know I took a bunch of I took like
120 tenants to go
to a city council meeting and we're like demanding
these protections against
renovictions right and we had like a whole
I wrote a set of like
things that we would demand and insist
and it was crazy because
they were like oh yeah yeah yeah we're on it
and I was like well what do you mean you're on it and then he read the proposals
and it was like 80% of the stuff that we
were asking for they were doing it already
you know what I mean
and it was like look it doesn't save the thing
it doesn't change capitalism it doesn't change the landlord
tenant relationship but it made
a big difference in the people that I see
who are dealing with like renovictions and shit like
you can you know and there's
some that that party
in different boroughs is getting
you know gets corrupt by the real estate agents
and they kind of water down legislation but like
that's such a big change
without much I didn't even have to
apply any pressure but you know what I mean like you got to apply some pressure
and get these big you know
you only have three four people on the city council
like there's so much stuff you could do
without yeah anyways
yeah exactly no I mean it's like
that's like that's not
now that it kind of seems like I just like
had a kidney transplant and apparently I'm going to
like be around
or whatever you know I'm like
okay like I guess I'm
digging back into this like this work
that I did you know like
four or five years ago where I was really like
all up in like all of the sort of
like resource planning documents
and stuff that pertain to this region in the city
and I was trying to come up
with some kind of like alternate sort of like
people's plan for just like
you know creating local like self
sufficiency and you know and like
putting out the adjut prop like the zoning
maps and shit you know like getting people to like
like make me like fucking
alternate zoning maps and stuff like that and
you know I really and I really
enjoy it but it's still there's just this question
like in the
situation we're in now
where it's like the question still remains
of how to create social cohesion
sufficient to even like do this kind of
organizing to get that it's like
yeah cuz mean it yeah
municipal organizing is easier but it's still
hard to get people like I forget
how did I get the 120 people there was
the coming the housing committees
it's just because so many people are getting
renavicted and I was just like
putting stuff on social media so I had a lot of
clients a lot of friends and somehow
yeah and that was
but we didn't even that's the crazy thing is we
didn't even need to do that they were doing it already
you know like I don't know so that was
but but you but
yeah I know that's just wild that we had that city
council that's pretty cool you know
it wasn't perfect like that other 15%
matters you know but
yeah but if you know
but you can get 200 people
together that's not you get 200 people
go see your band you know what I mean
like if you get 200 people to see your
band why can't you get them to go to the city
council when everyone's freaking out about getting renavicted
there's
and that's why I really believe in that social club
thing like you know you turn
your you turn your band thing into like hey
everybody we're all gonna go to city hall
tomorrow who wants to come you know 50 out
of the 200 people might come like I don't know
there's you gotta organize on some cultural
level you know
yeah I mean
it's and it's really too bad actually because
there was what we have in Portland
is a situation where it's like
there's just no space left like
commercial real estate development has just
like proceeded to this stage where it's
like if you want to do a show
not at a bar if you want to have
a meeting if you want to like
I mean there's just nowhere left to do stuff
like that like all the like you know
I mean like I've been in the city long enough to remember when there was
when there were like warehouses and anarchist
bookstores and like you know when there was just like fucking
spaces and they're like seriously kind
of all gone
but then in 2020
because we had just such like sustained
conflicts with the police here
the police police unions
in the United States will do this like work slow down
thing that I don't understand
the reasoning behind it where they're like we're gonna show
people how badly they need us by not
doing our jobs that makes no
fucking sense to me but okay it does
it makes sense oh wait
wait I just thought of something let me
I forget but it makes sense
because they're not putting pressure so much
on the public I mean maybe they think
they're putting pressure on the public because then the president's like oh great
like I don't need the fucking cops are asking
me on when I'm doing a stop sign on my bicycle
or whatever fucking nonsense they're doing right
or drinking in the park
but what they
the cities rely
this is why police have so much power and this is
why police get away with so much shit
because the cities
depend on fines from police
to have their budget together
so the police there's so many levels
that the police has like
so first of all yeah the huge
chunk of the budget comes just from police I forget how much it is
but it's like when they stop collecting
tickets everybody's life improves
but the city starts to fucking completely
fall apart so the police have
so much leeway that they can get away with all kinds
of shit and that's why they keep oh what happened here
they can keep getting bigger and bigger
budgets because the city is like hey whatever
you want whatever you want because you we depend on
you right and just harassing
people for stupid stuff and then
if you're
a prosecutor you can't
get any wins without the cop
coming in to testify
so and you can't advance without getting
those wins so they kind of
have disproportionate power over
the justice system too in the courts
if there's just so many locuses
of power that they have that
anyways I'm going off in a tangent but
wait what we're talking about you're talking about the spaces
you're saying is just that the police
kind of retreated in this really significant way
and it allowed
it allowed us to do so like
summer 2020 was really epic for fighting
the police in the street but then summer 2021
was really epic for
doing like outdoor events with sound
systems that would normally get shut down
by the police but all of a sudden it was
like just like open mother fucking
season like you want to do something you just get
to do it and it was
magic oh my god
it was so much fun some of the
some of the most like I mean
I have spent a life of going to shows and stuff
but some of the most epic experiences I've had
with that were like summer 2021
in Portland
but that made me feel like okay
like if this continues if this dynamic
continues which it kind of didn't
you know it's like you could just
like you don't need space like at least
if it's nice out you can like do stuff
in like more public spaces and I have
been thinking about like because
another thing that comes up for me a lot of the time is
like sometimes if you create
a really broad frame like who wants
to do something about climate change or whatever it's like
you just get a room full of people
where you're like oh okay like these people
showed up like I guess you know but like
I've been thinking about
doing some kind of like
taking the podcast into
because it was always based on my love of doing
like free school type like
class workshop type things you know
like I mean thinking about doing some kind of
like education like
discussion series in some park
or on some campus or whatever
and trying to use that as a basis
because like the people who write to me
about the podcast I'm like oh I wish we all
lived in the same place because this is an amazing
group of people you know where it's like
I kind of want to get people
to like you know like see
if I can sort of like filter
people through like a process of
engaging with some kind of prolonged dialogue
where it's like we get a group of people
that work well together and have like enough of a
that you know that you have on the same page
but that's also that's also the
thing behind like the social club group
is because you just and it ends up being a
space where people who think
alike and liked and get along well
hang out you know if you don't get along there
you're just not going to hang out there and that's just
ends up being the thing and the the
Floyd that Floyd protests like those police
protests that's another sign of look what the
internet can do like if there was no internet
you couldn't have that there's like a zillion people
that's like at the end of the day they didn't
accomplish anything really because they didn't
know what they're doing and there's they didn't
have like form they had half formed ideas
and then they let like they name it black
lies matter street and they're like yeah we
win and they go home you know but
the fact that
just imagine people who knew what they were
doing and you can get all those people to
come out on the street you can have enormous
if they had like let's have a legislative
agenda let's have a set program
of what we actually what you know
okay that's slogan is unpopular
let's frame it differently
so that people understand that
oh they cut $100
from the mental hospital they give $20
to cops to go you know beat up the crazy
guys running down the street so
that's easy to convey that idea
then you create a legislative program
defund refund or transfer
you know I don't know you get some snappy
slogan of how you take money out of the police and
then the police guess what cops you don't have to go
beat up because the cops don't like beating up
schizophrenics they don't fucking like that shit
there's all kinds of shit that the cops the cops know
they're not a social worker you talk to police
they don't want to do this shit they don't like it
they know they're not good at it well some of them are psychos
you know and they like doing it but a lot of them
don't like doing it so you can get
some kind of support for this legislative agenda
it makes sense and then if there's a giant
massive protest for the entire country
it's fucking going bananas in the streets
you have an agenda that you're pushing that
can actually be implemented because it's specific
versus just like defund the police
and I knew so many people they're just like
yeah we're just gonna have no police
I'm like yeah but you still have capitalism
and all the incentives to steal and all the incentives
to hurt each other like what how
what are you gonna do you know
and it's like you're saying yeah we're gonna have a defense force
of like
non police
armed dudes
well I don't know
we're probably gonna have to break this into
two pieces or something
yeah we didn't even get started
there's so much we didn't talk about there's so much biology
stuff to talk about the hunter gather
stuff to talk about
animals like I want to know more about the naked mole rats
I didn't know anything about that so you're saying that
they were by being in there's massive hierarchy
because they're an enclosed
environment yeah it's really
like that's super interesting they're freaky because
like um
you know about you know about like
people use the term you social like you social
insects you know what that is like the insects
that I have no I don't know so it's like
I know it but I don't
there's some group living insects that have
like you know I mean it's like they basically
have like
technological hierarchical mass
societies right where it's like
they have like ants and bees yeah exactly ants
and bees you know where it's like they
have some really elaborate
system of infrastructure basically that
they all rely on yeah and so that
creates yeah that creates these
conditions where like very intensive
hierarchies can emerge you know
um and so right like
there's this rule but there's this
like kind of rule in evolutionary
biology that the more a species depends
on some kind of like intensive
uh collectively maintained
infrastructure like
the less opportunities for dispersal
and just like you know like the less
escaped potential we would say in anthropology
or whatever there is and so the more the
social dynamics will tend towards like these
intense hierarchies or
they can anyway right you know
and um those
those types of insects at least with
bees they've evolved
like there's group evolution there's multi-level
selection happening in those colonies
so they literally
different it's like cells in your body
right because some cells in your
body they're not they're not your cells in your body
aren't fighting for their independent
evolutionary fitness they're serving
you know the the organism so those
you social insects are like
approaching becoming an
organism made up of small organisms
sort of like like the ants
are all sterile like they're completely
sterile but they protect the queen who
has all the babies like there's
yeah it's not the end of it like it's not
individual selection that we're used to it's completely
yeah exactly like biologists call them a
super organism and it's like
there's there's like the more the
more you get into that like the more that
there's like some kind of intense
collectively maintained infrastructure so
like a honeycomb or like you know like one
of those underground like
systems where they like have like
basically like air conditioning and they like
cultivate fungus and like leave cutter ants
the more like social
role differentiation you get right like
you get social complexity and massive
hierarchy
but then so you have like you have different
casts you know you have like the workers
that are like phenotypically different right
like they look different they have different body
parts they're different sizes
and a bunch of them don't reproduce and then
naked mole rats and they can even change
from one to another because it's in the right
conditions right because they have the same
genotype it's all just like a developmentally
contingent you know like they're
developmental polyphenisms or whatever
right right right and so
naked mole rats are the only
mammal that sort of approximate
this where they they live in these
like underground burrow systems that have
to be collectively maintained they don't
have the option to just go somewhere else
and it's like a massive
level of hierarchy where only
one dominant female reproduces
right so like it's you sociality
in that sense where it's like all the rest of them
are just like working towards this group end
of like keeping this one pregnant
female like this dominant
female like the bees
like the bees or the ants or whatever
but then the fucking female the breeding
adults
change in size like they actually
look different than the rest of them and they like
grow to these like giant proportions
and they even get more like
brain tissue and stuff like that
like they're just a totally different animal
just like the difference between like queens
and workers and soldiers or whatever
it's like the queens and the rest of the
like species are like these totally different
organisms and
it's just like the same thing as the
you social insects but they're mammals and
they're so freaky looking because
like humans like humans and
naked mole rats are the only two like
hairless mammals right because we both
have this massive developmental delay
to achieve like the level of hypersociality
those sphinx cats too
the penis cats
but those are
are those a domestic cat
oh they must be
but in terms of like animals
that just like evolved hairlessness in some wild setting
it's just us and them
right because it's like developmental delay
in service of this like hyper
social behavior
oh wow
it's interesting though because humans
but humans like because I can ask you like
what's the application of that to humans
because humans as you know
have that egalitarian background
which is very atypical
of the other primates and of
you know of a super social
species like ours who is like
look how we have all this division of labor
and all this stuff that we've but we started
out as a totally egalitarian species
or a hyper egalitarian species how does
well I think that how does it apply
what's the connection you're making between those
you social just that it's not that
the hierarchy is an inevitable
consequence of the intensive
infrastructure but that species that
rely on some kind of like coordinated group
efforts are going to develop a level of
social cohesion and in complexity
so if like you have some kind of
intensive infrastructure so in the case of
naked mole rats it's the fucking like
underground burrows and in the case
of humans it's probably like largely
fire as well as like whatever
just sort of like social cohesion
was necessary to like
raise kids over a long period of time
you know like the collective
childcare
childcare is the grey ceiling
is all about the childcare huh
I feel like that goes hand in hand with
the fire thing like I see
cooperative breeding and fire as probably
like you know like they
probably have like a really intimate
relationship with one another
as you get more calories from the fire
yeah yeah yeah totally
cooking the meat yeah that makes sense
but so you have those two aspects
like somebody has like before when we could control
fire but we couldn't make it you had to have
people like hang out to just like tend to
fire so that's an instinct
division of labor and then of course like
alo parenting and you know like
helping out raising you know
like the young of any
given generation it's like those two
things create this need for
like massive social cohesion and
complexity like role differentiation
and cohesion but I think that
you can have that wither without intense hierarchy
but you can't escape
you can't like not live in a group right
and so right you have to
or else we all die right and
that the
what's interesting about that
alo parenting meaning
parenting from more than just the mom
basically because like it's
actually rare that dads even be involved in
a lot of species especially and other
unrelated
members of the species it's like
shocking it's very rare like if
if the gorillas or chimpanzees
if you let your baby alone
the other moms or dads will go kill
your kids because their competition
right and humans are special because
like look the fact that we adopt children
people will go
do ever it's almost evolutionary suicide
it's like I'm gonna waste all
my resources like in it from an evolutionary
Dawkins type of level right
I'm gonna waste all these resources
and get a job and pay
all this money to raise
this person that's not my genes maybe
it's a different race maybe it's a kid from China you know
all those white kids raising kids from China or whatever
like why would that's evolutionary
insanity right it only
makes sense in the context of a
super social species that
is so social that
I'm gonna raise your kids because you're gonna raise my
kids and we're all gonna raise each other's kids like that's
that's such a basis for socialism
right like it's so
you know yeah
that's such a foundation
more that socialist evolutionary
psychology
it's really yeah
when we do this again we should talk more about a lot of that stuff
there's a lot of these
arguments that how
evolutionary psychology is so dominated by the right
because
it's just a bunch of racists who want to
say that black people are less smart than white
people and women are less dominant
than men and to justify all the existing
hierarchies but you can flip that same
research around and just make
it all justify
political egalitarianism and socialism
in such huge ways
especially because I'm just so like
I mean like my biggest like theoretical
dispute with that stuff like
like just like setting aside
you know the very
strong like you know
tendency for a certain world view to be
justified in the type of evolutionary
psychology most people practice
is just that whole thing where they're like
oh yeah I do evolutionary theory
where I don't worry about any of like the mechanisms
of trait construction or anything like
that right it's just like I just pause
it absolute like ultimate evolutionary
pressures and then outcomes right
like I don't worry about like
the like oxytocin receptor density
and the hypothalamus
like there's no there's no like
proximate mechanisms and I'm like homie
like you can't you know and it's like
evolutionary theory but how do you do that
but how do you do that like because you just
have to know about biology
to do that you actually have to know
about organisms so it's like
like a classic example is that the
traits of the domestication syndrome
have been analyzed in isolation
by those type of evolutionary
theorists who are like yeah I don't
fuck with proximate mechanisms so let me
tell you about like the evolutionary
pressure that led to the short snubby nose
and the round head and the
like loss of sexual dimorphism
and you know and it's like a different
pressure for each trait and they're just
like they just like have these complicated
maps of like mathematical gibberish and it's
like no it's actually because all these
traits are governed by a common developmental
mechanism but you have to actually condescend
to like do some fucking biology
with your biology right and like look at
it so if you understood because I actually
I don't know this you know this so
basically you're saying that the evolutionary
pressures are affecting one governing
system or aspect of the biology which
is causing all these other traits
to happen and they're like a spandrel
you know spandrel
do you know that they're like
they're just like byproduct of the
important thing and these other things
are there which are not actually
evolutionary significant they're just the
byproduct of the thing that is evolutionary
significant. Yeah yeah it's like
because in embryogenesis like when a
new you know when an organism is
forming there's a structure called
crest and it's like this group of cells
that's like up top like by your
like what will become your spinal cord
invertebrates and
these these cells
like this massive tissue
sends out cells in like all around
the body to differentiate into all
kinds of different like structures
like different like types of cells
so like on the one hand like some of
them become melanocytes the thing that
give pigment to like our skin or the
fur of an animal
and some of them become adrenal glands
right so if an animal
is experiencing selection against
aggression it's going to
simultaneously become less aggressive
and it's going to have like a piebald coat
like it's going to have depigmentation of a fur
right it's not because there's some
evolutionary pressure out there and
if you do that kind of evolutionary psychology
babble it's like you would never know that
you would just write some paper
about why you would do some like fucking
game theory war between a hypothetical
ideal for a piebald coat
versus like an all dark coat
and you'd be like so as you can clearly see
the piebald coat gene wins or whatever
and it's just fucking nonsense
and it's like so much evolutionary
theory is like that where it's like
they just it's and it's like that thing
that dude in discipline mind says where it's
like theoretical
work like the more abstract and disembodied
it is is always preferred
because we live in a culture where there's
a hierarchy where like physical work
is less fucking valued than like mental
work so if you're like
like the more abstract and disembodied that
your theory is the more prestigious
so it's like all these evolutionary theorists
who are like oh I don't get my hands dirty
with like actual organisms like I'm a biologist
but I'm just thinking about the piebald coat
you know but I just speak
and like truth just emerges from my
the other function
of that hyper ultra specialization
you saw that in the Soviet Union too
it's that if you're a scientist
I think he talked about in discipline minds
basically if you're a scientist and you're basically making nuclear bombs
a lot of scientists are going to not
feel good about making nuclear bombs
but if you're just deciding like
the heat of atoms that it takes
for the atoms to travel from here to there
and you're looking at some minute little nonsense thing
then you don't feel guilty
because you're not well I don't know whatever they do with this
they do with it but I'm not doing anything wrong
I'm not doing anything bad and in the Soviet
not exactly really but in the Soviet Union
they had such hyper specialization
of education
that you got
your degree in mechanical engineering
of ball bearings
you didn't learn general stuff
because the more you know
the more you might be able to understand
systems and
react to them and challenge them
but the less the more hyper focused you are on nonsense
the more
of a tool you can be
ball bearings management or whatever
you got your PhD in ball bearing
engineering
yeah
which is again like that's another form
of like diminishing social cohesion
ultimately it's like people don't have the same
vocabularies to talk to each other
and be like hey why is the world this way
and not some other way like we all have the same
knowledge and the same terminology
and understanding like we could conceive
a different world that we could make together right
but you can't if everybody's like
hyper but then yeah
and you don't know anything yeah
there's no generalists anymore everybody's
so knowledgeable about nothing
that they can't translate into anything that anybody
else can use together plus there's all the gibberish
language that when you are
it's funny because those sciences
which are the most
tendency
which would be most amenable to
ordinary people thinking about them
like anthropology like there's nothing so
complicated anthropology that average Joe you know
there's stuff in science that might be too complicated
for somebody to understand
but there's nothing in anthropology that's too
complicated for average Joe to understand there's nothing
in history that's too complicated right anyone
could understand it so you have to
turn it into absolute gibberish
so that none of the ideas get out there
you know so that there's no
make sure nobody understands this
you know making sure nobody understands
that like yeah
can see beyond their nose
yeah yeah I know
it's interesting though because it's like
it's like a lot of those
EP guys it's like
I don't know it's like okay they're
totally willing to write these like
ostensibly like sweeping books
of synthesis where they're like you know
I'm gonna unify all fucking knowledge
into like a grand tapestry
narrative and like tell you why
like you know why we went from
like early prebiotic
chemical evolution to like the United
States of America and why hierarchy is
good or whatever you know but then like
but then they don't do synthesis in their
own goddamn discipline where
it's like homie like stop
with the like game theory like you're basically a
mathematician and just like actually
learn biology like actually
like learn about you know like
how organisms and so you do you have
like these like more sequestered people
who are like I actually know
something about how traits develop and
it's not like those guys say but they
don't write those books and those guys don't have
communication with those other
guys I you see this a lot
in any anthropologist
in every discipline where somebody
writes something like I
someone had a critique of one of the David Graver books
about this but anyways somebody's writing about
something and across the hall
all they have to go do is knock on the economic
guys the economics professor
guys thing oh how does this work or
why do people think this and they would just
have a much better theory but they
just don't do it they're just fucking jacking off in
their own thing because you don't want to be collaborating
because that's like gay or whatever
you're just supposed to you're supposed to
be you're supposed to be all you
and you're all the big genius and you're this fountain
of genius you're not supposed to just go ask
everybody else hey how does this work because that's like weak
you know
what was oh yeah no
see I don't know like yeah I know very
little of that biology stuff that you're talking about
but it's a fault like you're right you know
like I knew I knew a little bit of
it but I've never I haven't focused on it and that's
exactly right that makes up yeah because I
did study it but not so much in the context
of the traits that I'm
sort of interested in and I'm like oh my god
that like when you're saying that it's like oh my god
that makes perfect sense like of course
yeah yeah it is weird
I mean I actually like like I have
very little academic exposure
but I took like the biology for science
major series and it's weird
what they kind of leave out you know where
it's like you get a good sense of how like DNA
reproduces but you don't get
much of a sense at least the way I took it
like of differential gene expression and
stuff like that so you still it's weird
it ends up doing this thing
so where do you learn
about it then like where did you learn about
it and some other you're reading about
something else they're just reading
something on your yeah because I don't even know
because I always did this right because this
was the earth for this started like 25
years ago because the earth first tradition
was like go find a national
forest where they're like doing a bunch
of fucked up timber sales
learn about all the endangered species
and then like do legal challenges
or whatever right so
when I was like a kid I learned
like a lot of conservation biology
just by reading national forests like legal
documents and then like looking at the
bibliographies and then going and getting all those
papers and that like started my process
of scientific and then
you know somewhere like years before I
actually went to college I just bought
a biology textbook and read the fucking
thing you know and then I had
that and then yeah but
it was all just like it was all
just going to like
you know I mean like I mean now
we have Psyhub and stuff like that so it's really easy
to just like get a mess of papers but
it was always just following
trails from bibliography to bibliography
and that's how I learned
stuff too and I would actually
was going to school I was
in music school in
much else a lot cheaper
so but I was going to music but I would take
like one course so could have access
to all the practice rooms and the recording studios
and the library
and I was like the reason I got into
I mean politics I had some teacher who made us watch
like Noam Chomsky movie when I was like 19
and I was like and I was like you know working
in a job trying to survive and just like
hating everything and this like oh my god this is
this is explaining everything that I'm going through right
but then
the
like the anthropology and all that stuff I was
just listening to John Coltrane I was very
into him and then I was reading about how
he was influenced by the
pygmy music because he listened to a
CD of Colin Turnbull like the forest
people guy he released a CD
of them and then I took
that CD out and I was listening to that music and I was like
this is really interesting and I was like let's read this book
about Colin let's what's Colin Turnbull have to say
and I was like what
what is this is crazy like how do you
you know and you can see to this day that's amazing
how in the education systems they don't connect
the things that you need to understand
and actually it's marginally related but like in that
Orlando Figue this book that we both read
because I was reading all these other
books about peasants specifically
you could see
him like that's a liberal type of
book so you didn't really
get the
story of what could have been
done better how this could have actually worked
who you know like you you get this
like it's the people like such a live
live person oh the people's
tragedy oh it's just
the series of tragedies and there's no
explanation of what could have
maybe done better like what could at what point
you know he pointed out that everything did
everything wrong but it's just like oh everything's
so sad and so tragic but wait a second when you
read those other specialists who are just writing
books about peasants and they're not
you're like whoa wait a second
that's the whole pictures missing from the Orlando
Figue where you're like those peasants
were communists Marx understood
that they were communists he was actually
talking about let's build socialism on this
Lenin didn't understand that because
Plekinov hid it all from their
generation anyways and then you see these mistakes
were made and there was a solution
to it you know what I mean like all these
that's all the stuff in act that's why
you're lucky that
you didn't go to academia that much
oh yeah like and I'm lucky to
I didn't go to academia really till
I was in my 30s and that
saved me from
getting because what happens is
from age four till
age 30 something you've literally
never had you're like those going to the
people kids like you've literally never had a
life experience outside of these like
education institutions so it's like
you're eating all this pie you're eating all this
stuff but you have no life experience
through which to understand
and evaluate what is this theory
good I know this theory is bullshit
because I've worked in a job
and I've seen that you know
the landlord-tenant
relationship isn't a fair contract
so I know that this book about contracts is
bullshit right because I had this experience
but if you're just fucking living at your mom's house
and you've never fucking had a job really
besides this university context where it's like fair
you can't evaluate what you're reading
it's just oh this makes perfect sense this makes sense
and by the time you're 30 you're just a gibberish
and I've seen like you have really
brilliant people I mean the people
that I like the best were the ones who had life experiences
right but you you take these brilliant minds
and you just turn them into gibberish
regurgitators who can't
evaluate anything right and then
then they become adults and they've never
had a real life experience
to judge anything but I because I was
like 35 when everybody else is
25 I had like that 10 years
of experience where I'm like oh this is bullshit
that's nonsense I
remember I had a class once and this teacher
was it was weird because I went there
thinking maybe we talked about this already
that oh I'm older
maybe it's gonna be weird
because I'm not used to hanging out with normal society
so maybe those teachers
who are in their 60s I might be weird
with them because I don't know how to act normal
with them but it'll be with the younger
teachers I'll get around better it was the complete opposite
the younger teachers were
the ones that I that I felt like
threatened and they were like trying to kill me and that
that they were like you know there were
some weird classes and the older people were really cool
because of the pressures
that young people under a fuck where I'm even going
with this the point is I'm in one of these classes
with a teacher that I liked and it
was about the anthropology
of care was the name
of the class and we're studying
in India
charity and how the philosophy
of charity in India
is that when you give
donations you don't
think about what happens with your money
you just give it to the Brahmins
and then you know that you've done a good
deed and and you
feel good about it and you're laughing already right because
anyone with life experience is like oh that's
just a scam like the Brahmins
invented that as a scam
so they can just do whatever they want with the money
and who knows what they're fucking doing because there's no surveillance
right and I said
that and and they're like
oh that's interesting and like
people were finding this really interesting like why
are you not thinking of this yourself this is like the most
obvious shit dude that's a scam
like but they never
thought of the text
they're reading in terms of life experience
right like that's so
anyways whatever it's not that interesting
a story but it's just like that kind of thing like that's such
a prevailing like when you go on twitter
when you see all these people
the top journalists all those top people
they've gone from age four
to age 40
in these bubbles where they
have no life experience to judge anything
like their life experiences okay once you start
having kids and you start having
heartbreaks and you start having certain you are having
some life experiences you know but you're not
you're not having that experience
of like fighting against
the landlord and against your boss
and struggling against all this bullshit
and poverty and all this nonsense
anyways I don't know I'm just going off
it's super interesting to me too how like for all
of the academic disciplines that are out there
there's nothing that is practically
focused on the dynamics of power
that requires experience to claim expertise
in where it's like
like I feel like
you know if I wanted to say some shit
and be considered a scientific expert
and like intergroup
territorial aggression in chimpanzees
or like Imbuti pygmies I'd have to go
do like I'd have to actually
go like fucking look around
and see what chimpanzees do or like right you know
but it's like there's no scientific
field where making proclamations
about power dynamics and power
and how like societies work
and can be changed requires that you actually
go out and try to like change
anything in society or like do
politics in any like
but who's making those proclamations
like like polycy?
so that's the thing is that it just ends up being
everybody's job from whatever
right so it's like like I just
you know like this book
by these biologists the survival of the friendliest
that you know it's like
a type of biology I cite a lot
right it's like they you know it's like they have
the inevitable pivot that I feel like so many books
by scientists have where it's like
oh and now we're going to talk about what this means
in terms of like how you should behave
if you're trying to like change the dynamics
of society or whatever and it's like
they're like so let us
uncritically cite Chenoweth and Stephon's
why civil resistance works
the strategic logic of nonviolence
and like let us just like you know it's like
some liberal shit that you could get on
fucking Facebook or whatever right and it's like
well okay but like
you guys don't know what it's like
like you've never done it
you've never participated in any of that
you've never shaken hands with a senator
about something and realized by the look in their eyes
that they had no idea what you were talking about
like you've never been to a fucking meeting
and seen the kind of personalities
that shape the dynamics of like a group
like you just don't fucking know
because you have no lived experience with this at all
but it's like but like making
those kind of proclamations is just left up
to whoever wants to like talk about it
it's totally fine it's not it's not judged
like okay this is a cool book
but this person doesn't have experience in that
so we'll take a little bit of a grain of salt
because nobody has nobody has any experience with that
the people with experience in that shit
aren't writing any of those books and they're not doing anything
yeah
the practical application
man
I remember speaking to the head of
the NDP party
like this socialist ish party
the social democratic party and I asked him
like a point of question about healthcare
and dude looked me like he was gonna
pee pee his pants he knew
he had no idea what I was fucking talking about
just like what do you mean how could you not
I felt so bad I was like how do you not know this
oh my this is like such an important thing
like the
conservative party before changed the
like healthcare increases
inflation like the actual inflation
of cost of healthcare increases 6% a year
so it gets exponentially very big right
and they had that 6%
built into the formula for funding
healthcare to the provinces but then the
conservative guy changed the formula so that it
would slowly go down to 3% which means
every province is having a
today this is like a few years ago
is having a system busting
crisis right so I went to
dude and I'm like okay this is a huge
issue and
it's really really popular public
healthcare is super popular even among
right wingers like everybody's
believes in public healthcare in this country
almost except for the richest people and
you know what
policies do you have for that and literally
dude did not even understand what I was saying
I know that subject you know what I mean
I just explained to you in 2 seconds and you
totally got it and he was like looking at me
like pee pee in my pants pee pee in my pants
and he said some weird shit and then ran away
and I was like oh that's too red
that's why all those conspiracy people are
like dude when you talk to the people
who run stuff they don't
know any there is dumbass
as anybody like he doesn't take
any you know oh somebody was telling
me oh yeah you know capitalism sorted
out the good that smart
have you met capitalists
like have you talked to people that run
companies like okay
there's a certain level of intelligence
that you might have to have but
you can hire managers to do everything
like I talked to these real estate
people fucking morons
all you have to do is fall out of the right
uterus and you're fucking good right
like that's no I had
I had a conversation with a friend of mine
about doing a startup because I'm like
really interested in all this synthetic biology
stuff like enhancing photosynthesis
and whatever and I was like you know
he was basically claiming like
they're kind of starting to get sick of the
investing class is starting to get sick of like
social media you know and like
it's promise of supposedly making money
somehow or another and there's like this
pivot to like climate tech or whatever
and I was like okay maybe this could be a thing
but then he explained to me he's like yo
you got to understand if we make a presentation
to these people like they've got like
a seventh grade understanding of the world
they don't know anything and they're insecure about it
and you cannot make them feel stupid
and I was like yeah these are the
motherfuckers with like all the power in the room
right you know it's like these guys like
yep yep the people funding everything
you know like
wow