Title: 66 a Saboteur S Moon Sheds No Light Excerpt
Episode #: 68
Episode ID: 13310424
Source: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/13310424-66-a-saboteur-s-moon-sheds-no-light-excerpt.mp3
------------------------------------------------------------

=== EPISODE METADATA ===
Generated: 2026-01-12 01:02:05
Episode ID: 13081012
MP3 File: 13081012-metamorphosis-pt-3-3-your-body-is-a-map-of-the-sky.mp3
Title: Metamorphosis pt. 3.3: Your Body Is a Map of the Sky
Podcast/Artist: Against the Internet
Album/Series: Fight Like An Animal
Source URL: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/13081012-metamorphosis-pt-3-3-your-body-is-a-map-of-the-sky.mp3
========================
Have there been any other changes? Have there been any changes perhaps to the way you're thinking?
Sometimes people tell us that they're thinking changes in some way,
so for example they might feel that they're getting thoughts put into their head that aren't their own.
Have you had any experiences like that?
Yeah, I do think things that aren't made, like to put in stuff in my brain.
It's not me, I'm not thinking.
So different thoughts in your brain?
Yeah, it's not that the physical world was basically just a machine that God created
and this soul substance was in some ways just kind of a separate thing infused into this otherwise just purely mechanical world that was in the human person.
So a way to show this impact in his thought, for example, is to look at how he looked at animals.
So he basically viewed animals as machines that they had no consciousness at all, which I think is a very strange view.
And so in Descartes' view then animals don't have souls, humans don't have souls.
So we come to the point then, friends, where we should try to do with all of this information that we have assessed throughout the course of this episode.
We should try to kind of do what we did last episode, which is to talk about evolution experientially to get out of the subtraction a little bit
and talk about what it would have been like to be in these different phases of human evolution
within eye toward understanding what it would be like to make conscious choices about the evolutionary paths we decide to venture down through the global crisis that we're currently in.
And then to, as we did last time, to take those kind of descriptions of subjective experience and relate them to the actual brain changes that happened throughout the course of anatomically modern humanities journey
and the major transition we experienced 100,000 years ago.
And then we will tie that in to this mind blowing evolutionary theory.
Those brain changes will be discussed in terms of the truly paradigm shattering evolutionary theory I promised at the beginning of this.
I admit not particularly brief episode at the very end.
We'll talk about the continuity, how like the legacy of these middle stone age cultures and, you know, the explosion of cognitive modernity that we see about 100,000 years ago today
and how there are indeed some populations in Africa which really do for as much as anthropologists fall all over themselves a lot of the time to be like,
we're not saying anybody is an archaic remnant of anything.
These populations are in a very significantly material sense, you know, like remnants of something that has been around for an awfully long time.
So as we did last episode, let's briefly connect experience with, you know, with the evolution of our brains.
What we talked about last time was changes in gene expression, driving a, you know, neotenuse changes in gene expression, driving an increase in the density of neurons in our prefrontal cortex.
And we mostly related that to the subjective experience of symbolism.
We've been talking about in this episode also, translating different realms of embodied experience, sensation, whatever, you know, behavioral modes into abstraction.
So this time, let's talk more about the plasticity element of the behavioral changes that we see in this time.
And then relate them to some other brain changes that cumulatively between what we discussed last episode in this one should give us a pretty good sense of the shifts in brain organization
and development that characterize modern humanity.
I think we all in our modern experience have some sense of this basic reality that people are in really different positions in life, partially because of how afraid they are to navigate unknown variables.
That is a temperamental distinction that is fundamental to the evolution of humanity is very much a temperamental distinction that is very evident all around us today.
We can all think, I shouldn't say that, a lot of us can think of people we know who are stuck in situations that are not good for them.
And that, you know, have some like very significant adversity associated with them have characteristics you might want to say things about like nobody should put up with this.
But they're terrified, right? You know, a relationship, you know, whatever it is a job, just any kind of situation, you know, staying with people in some horrible, you know, configuration of relationships,
but at least it's shelter, you know, like whatever, right? And then I think at least a lot of us have had some level of experience, you know, along.
This is a very, very wide continuum, but some level of experience of needing to go navigate the unknown, right?
To find out what's out there. And I don't know, I'm actually really curious if other people have had the kind of subjective experience that I'm about to try to like describe from a few episodes in my life.
And I would actually I would really encourage people to write and tell me if they feel like what I'm talking about is something that's familiar to them if they know if they have had some version of this experience themselves.
And I would also like while I'm at it, the, the experience that I described in the last that why I've described so many times in this podcast now because one of those things I'm haunted by where I'm like this is a subjective
experience that if other people had the world would be different, you know, of interacting with a raven when I was 16, and kind of going on the path in life that I took as a result.
Somebody wrote to me and talked about how they had a similar experience with a reindeer. I believe they're somewhere up in Scandinavia.
And it made me genuinely curious. I don't know. They asked if there was any like literature about this or anything, that sense of reciprocal awareness of thinking like, whoa, we're different but the same.
We're both aware of each other right now and we're aware that we're aware of each other. And we know we're having the same thought process.
Yeah, I don't know. Really transformative thing. So if you either know of descriptions of this in some text somewhere or whatever, or this has happened to you, I would also be terribly curious for people to write and tell me about that.
But yeah, this moment that I want to talk about this, for me anyway, this usually relatively brief phase of a kind of like heightened experience of something that then has very long term or essentially permanent reverberations or implications.
I have kind of, sometimes in my internal system of like linguistic shortcuts, I call it the Max von Seidau moment after his role in the Igmar Bergman movie, The Seventh Seal, where death comes for him.
He convinces death to play a game of chess to decide his fate. They play it over the course of a long journey.
Somewhere in the midst of that, the night character, Max von Seidau's character has been very, very troubled.
And then he has this moment where he looks at his hand and he says, this is my hand. I can move it. There is blood flowing in my veins.
This sun is at its zenith in the sky and I, Antonius Block, am playing chess with death, right?
And he's no longer negotiating with reality. You know, he's just accepting the world on precisely the terms that exists.
And it's not as if he has come to some resolution where he has ensured victory.
He's exulting in the sense of just engaging with whatever happens as it happens in the manner that it happens.
And he no longer needs to psychologically mitigate the impact of that in any way.
And so this is, you know, I've also talked about this very much in terms of overcoming processes of denial or the process of integrating trauma,
which is one of the examples that I have. So I want to mention, try to get through these really quickly,
but I want to mention three experiences that have all had like a very particular quality of experiencing an overwhelming stimulus,
like a set of things to navigate. One of them is very concretely about sort of like a mode of subsistence
or, you know, a way of getting through the world and the sort of the resolution or whatever it was,
the integration of that that I experienced. The first one was kind of the final phase that I don't think I ever have described
of this experience, this life-changing experience I had with a raven in Vermont when I was 16.
And it was that I saw, I've described in great detail before this embodied experience of literally zooming out
and seeing the world on like a much greater scale, seeing a greater complexity to everything.
And the particular quality that that experience had was, in my vision or whatever, seeing a pretty infinite network
of all these nodes, all these like illuminated circular nodes connected by lines, right?
Like a network map. And seeing that perturbation of any one of those would, you know, alter the dynamics
not only of the nodes it was directly connected to, but by virtue of the connections that every node in the network
had to every other, you know, all the nodes and that this was always constantly happening,
that they were all undergoing various perturbations and therefore, you know, cascading changes
that could only be talked about in extremely elaborate statistical terms were, you know,
progressing through the whole network and, you know, causing changes in every single node constantly.
And there was this sense of this torturous complexity, this level of awareness of different possibilities,
different truths that could come into my awareness, different things that I could have to try to understand
or interact with in some functional way. And there was just this intensely painful sense that this was completely
beyond the scope of any mind, that this was way, way, way outside of anybody's analytical capacity
or like the scope of no one's being was sufficient to contain all this.
And then, you know, there is this kind of this sense of like, how much of this can you endure?
How much of this can you endure and wanting more and more and just, you know, like, like it being agonizing
but kind of accepting these, these waves of sensation of this torturous complexity washing over me.
And then this sort of final stage where I felt like I wanted an infinity of complexity,
where, you know, where I no longer had any interest in trying to mitigate my sense of the extent of the complexity
that comprised reality for the sake of some kind of psychological comfort or whatever.
And that even if it destroyed me, I just wanted to engage with as much of the universe as possible.
The sense of, yeah, just like a real, it wasn't a sense that there was going to be some kind of resolution
or that I would gain some kind of ultimate high level insight from that acceptance that, you know,
it was like a true letting go of the need for comfort.
And just like a real willingness to accept kind of these, in infinity of these like waves of really torturous sensations
of incalculable complexity that were washing over me.
Okay, so that's one.
And then very shortly after that I, you know, hopped trains around the country.
And as I've described elsewhere, I felt very much like I was having some version of an initiation process
that characterized so many traditional cultures.
And once again, I had the same experience.
But this time with respect to the sort of like immediate vicissitudes of my own navigation of the world
and capacity to find a means of survival within it.
You know, like once the money ran out and like, I, you know, I was just in this process of figuring out
like hopping trains alone around the country and just kind of like figuring out the trains
but also figuring out how to show up in a city and, you know, do something or other to survive.
And it stopped feeling like I needed a specific protocol that I needed any particular set of guidelines.
I stopped having any kind of emotional desire for a sense of cognitive closure
or certainty about anything that was happening.
And I felt this very just expansive sense of, yeah, of just willing this once again to navigate
an infinity of new situations that would demand new responses from me.
You know, new forms of hardship that I would have to figure out how to overcome new relationships
that I would have to forge in order to get from point A to point B
or find somebody to let me scrape paint off a house for a day to get enough money to eat
or just what the fuck ever.
And, you know, and then in association with that was very much the sense of like, I'm a man now.
And it's also interesting, right, to me if you also, for various reasons unrelated to my experience of that moment
there is a very significant regard in which that ultimately ended up feeling like kind of a failed initiation ritual
which I think it might be kind of characteristic for a variety of reasons in this very evolutionarily novel setting we inhabit.
So I'm also curious if people have had that sense before that they felt like they were undergoing an initiation ritual
and, you know, coming into some sense of what I just described and then it got like complicated or to like some degree thwarted or something.
And then the final one that I would mention real quick is just that in the process of integrating the traumas of my childhood
which began spontaneously on the autumn equinox when I was 37 years old in 2015
and lasted for three and a half months of actually dealing with connecting pieces of memory that had been like kind of fragmented
or reliving stuff that I remembered but kind of like needing to experience the full emotional extent of it
or in some cases actually recovering wholesale new episodic memories.
And then there was like a month after that where I just wasn't sleeping and I was just horrified and kind of waiting for the next thing to happen.
And it was finally one day, you know, I still wasn't sleeping.
I was taking an extraordinary toll on me physically.
Felt really, you know, I don't know how much I was sleeping and it would sound like I was exaggerating if I could figure it out.
But I mean, I really felt like the process might kill me.
And then there was this day that I went and looked in the mirror and kind of reflected on everything I had ever encountered in my whole life.
You know, face offs with Nazi, like giant out of prison Nazi like strapping Nazi men when I was like a tiny little 14 year old punk rock child.
And you know, like episodes of high speed chases and showdowns with the police and times I had to bury computers places and just the whole fucking thing, you know.
And I suddenly felt this real like, like just give me whatever, right?
Just like I'll take it, you know, this sense again of not needing to negotiate with the, you know, not needing to like mitigate psychologically the scope or the extent of the adversities or, you know, potential, you know, tragedies that I would have to confront
and this willingness, this sense that I'd always been in the process of confronting something terrible and that I could take kind of an infinite extent of these horrible memories washing over me.
If there were any more that for me to remember, and that was the night that I slept, you know, then for the first time in my life I started sleeping.
So, yeah, so those are three versions of this experience that I wanted to describe in some kind of, you know, explicit and personal detail, because as we progress into the final episode of the series, I want to, you know, really try to talk in some kind of like
non, you know, beyond platitudes, I want to actually talk experientially about what navigating this moment in a way that allowed us to actually like generate real possibilities instead of being on the default ride that these idiot fucking monsters who are in control of our lives
have put us on like what that would feel like and like what we would have to really like do in ourselves to get to these places that we're really, we don't seem to be reaching right now.
And I do, I want to emphasize that I think that that response, that mobilization of our capacities for as much as what I just described might make it sound like what I'm saying is like, oh, we just need a whole bunch more of the like fuck it,
I'm hard, kind of like mentality or whatever but I also think there's a way to do that that is its own form of a kind of like childish cop out, right, like seeking annihilation, like seeking overwhelming experiences that you have no real hope of successfully navigating
and just kind of like letting them destroy you is its own way to shut down and to not deal with the far more difficult thing of actually like staying in the game and staying focused and actually mobilizing your abilities to navigate variables in a way that requires real effort.
You know, and so it's like in evolutionary terms, as this threshold into modernity gets crossed, you know, we totally see that we see people enter all these new landscapes but it's not just a sense of want and adventure.
It's also this very deliberate. There's also tremendous. It's a fearlessness, but it's a fearlessness with a great quality of deliberation and careful assessments and self control, right.
This is when we first see really clear evidence for landscape scale fire, right. So this is not just people wandering into new landscapes and hoping it works out.
This is people really, you know, like entering a new level of sort of systemic oversight, guiding their behavior, thinking about the entirety of a system about the way that a whole changes cascade through a whole landscape and how that relates to their immediate sort of foraging
activities, right. And starting fires to, you know, to derive resources at much, much later times and stuff like that. And, you know, and this is also we just see this general expansion of humans into realms that we hadn't been in before, but also pretty
quickly that no other human species, even given like really, really long periods of time to adapt to various harsh conditions or whatever had ever occupied before, right. And so these were these were adaptations that one author calls it the generalist specialist niche, you know, but this is these were landscape occupations that
took tremendous courage but also tremendously concerted effort and, you know, like coordinated behavior and insight, self control.
So he basically viewed animals as machines that they had no unconsciousness at all, which I think is a very strange view. And so in Descartes' view, then animals don't have souls, but humans have souls.
So let's now finally talk about brain evolution. And let's let's put all of this behavioral and ecological and social and technological inference into, you know, some some actual sort of like explicit biology and ask ourselves what's
happening here in terms of our brains. So in the very first specimens that are called Homo sapiens from a little over 300,000 years ago, you know, those those specimens, it's just, we really just could use more again, just to repeat that.
But, you know, there might be some some brain size shift that's occurred from the very beginning of our species to later on. But that's not the case, you know, from say like 200,000 years ago, subsequent.
And, you know, brain size isn't the only way to determine intelligence. This is or, you know, it's not the only variable brain size or relative brain to body size ratio.
I mean, so just to give some sense of this, a book called Evolution of Large Brain and Body Size and Mammals talks about how, you know, they say comparisons of brain volumes implicitly assume those brains are composed in the same way.
And evidence that neuron number does not vary uniformly with brain mass across mammals has undermined this assumption during the proliferation of comparative studies on brain size.
And they describe some ways that this is true. The number of neurons and nonneuronal cells scales differently in different brain regions.
For instance, in humans, the cerebellum contains four times as many neurons as the neocortex, besides being, despite being significantly smaller, right?
So, you know, different brain regions in a given individual, a given species are going to have vastly different neural densities and across different taxonomic groups.
You know, the number of neurons and nonneuronal cells, the ratio thereof within any given brain region are going to scale very differently.
So, you know, this is a fundamental human difference throughout the course of anatomically modern humans is we just surely gained a greater neural density.
And so the studies that I cited last time in the last episode talked about this with respect to the neocortex because that's where they looked.
But I think that we could probably, it would be really interesting. I just don't know of any research that's done.
So we could probably look at gene expression profiles in other regions of the brain that, you know, generate synopses, genes that we share with other primates and probably find neotinous patterns just like in the neocortex.
It's probably like particularly pronounced in some regions over others and I'm sure the neocortex is one of those regions.
But yeah. And, you know, and then just generally speaking, it's also worth noting.
I think this helps us to kind of understand this point I keep trying to make in so many different ways about how intelligence is built from something.
And it's like very specific that it's always going to be a recruitment of the evolved capacities that a species had that, you know, has that evolved for other reasons.
And so I wanted to just briefly mention this paper, something from this paper called Beyond Brain Size.
I'm covering the neural correlates of behavioral and cognitive specialization published a couple years ago.
They have this table with all these different studies that are attempting to correlate brain size with some kind of cognitive measure or whatever across various species.
And I'm just going to mention some of the stuff from just one of them because I just want to give a general sense of this.
So they're critiquing this one study where the cognitive measure is problem solving and 39 species of carnivores using a puzzle box that could be open to obtain food.
And so here are some of the caveats that they, that they, you know, wanted to acknowledge with this particular study is, you know, that there could have been differences,
for instance, in just pure motivation. In the level of, I really liked that they included this one, a neophobia versus neophilia, right, in animals typical behavioral repertoires.
So, right, you know, like, like they might think they're just measuring some abstract, you know, species agnostic form of intelligence, but it's like there's a box and the animal hasn't ever seen it before.
And there's going to be like differing levels of motivation to approach and also different levels of, you know, fear or sort of interest in the approach avoid, you know, the approach avoid switch is going to be different across species.
The puzzle box could be opened in multiple ways. And here's where we get into, you know, if you're a species that has spent a lot of time manipulating, if you're a bird that spent a lot of time manipulating things with your beak,
you're going to find certain puzzles easier to solve than a species that doesn't spend a lot of time manipulating much of anything, which could get interpreted as some absolute measure of cognition when it's really kind of more a measure of the way cognition integrates with particular anatomical features
in particular like evolved behaviors. They talked about how a bunch of the animals in the experiment were captive zoo animals, which likely have quote variable rearing histories and experiences with enrichment or solving problems.
I think that's a nice way of saying that some of them are probably crazier from confinement than others. Yeah.
So I just wanted to like point that out as like a just one last kind of entry into this whole, you know, this whole like intelligence is made from something as much as people who talk about human intelligence want to describe it as a rupture in the fabric of reality.
It comes from like not just evolved capacities, but specific evolved capacities. You know, if you if you spend some time conceptualizing three dimensional coordinates on a sphere, you would have a different time doing it.
If you were an octopus, and you know, instead of kind of like imagining your own body, like traveling different dimensions of the sphere and like rotating yourself and looking at it from different perspectives, you could just conceptualize your beautifully undulating many appendages, like making various shapes that corresponded to, you know, I mean, it's just like that stuff matters.
Okay. But so, yeah, to get back to just specifically humans in this, this in the Middle Stone Age, there's kind of three broad phases of cognitive change and brain anatomical change that we can think about.
The first is just associated with the emergence of the Middle Stone Age and anatomically modern humanity, right? So that's 300,000 years ago or so. And then there is a change somewhere along the way in the cerebellum that's a part of your brain that is kind of like right at the very base, not too far away from where the spine connects, you know, at the bottom and toward the back.
And also in the parietal area, and that's if you put your, if you don't know this, like if you put your hand on your like forehead and the top of your head, that would be your frontal lobe. And then if you put your hand kind of like towards the top in the, you know, attending towards the back of your head, that's your parietal region.
The, you know, the surface of that is the parietal cortex and then below it is our other parietal regions. But, you know, and then you move all the way back. That's the occipital region. Right. If you read a JFK autopsy or, you know, here's somebody describing the JFK autopsy talking about how the CIA killed the man.
They'll talk about how is occipital, the occipital region of his head was half fucking missing. And then if you put your hand on either side of your head around your ear or whatever, that's that's your temporal lobes. And yeah, so, you know, so there's this this change in our parietal area.
And that's really pretty interesting. And then finally, there's the change that lines up very, very well in time with, you know, when dot dot dot something happened about 100,000 years ago, that yes, does involve a change in the shape of the front of our brains in the frontal lobe, but might actually not be about restructuring of the brain per se.
It might be about changes in face shape because there are some changes in our, you know, in our brains structure and its shape that aren't functional changes at all. But just happen because brains have to kind of negotiate with all these other features of our anatomy and just kind of decide like where to go.
Sometimes brain shape will change just because the brain needs somewhere to put all its mass. And there's pretty good evidence that the the frontal shape changes to the brain that we see in the advent of cognitive modernity are not because of like actual changes in brains, like functional brain structure.
But yeah, but because our faces are changing, leaving less room right our archaic homo sapiens neanderthals and whatnot had much bigger faces. And this is a characteristic of developmental delay. This is our neotenuse. This is a final stage of the neotenization of humanity kicking in.
So I would tend to associate that with the gene expression changes in certainly if not in other brain regions, certainly we know in the prefrontal cortex that I talked about last episode, you know, so that increase in density with the gene expression, the gene expression curve going on for years and years
of childhood that goes all the way down to nothing and like the first couple months of life in chimpanzees and macaques and whatnot.
Here's from a paper called the evolution of modern human brain shape. They say our data show that 300,000 years ago brain size and early homo sapiens already fall within the range of present day humans brain shape.
However, evolved gradually within the homo sapiens lineage reaching present day human variation between about 100,000 and 335,000 years ago.
This process started only after other key features of craniofacial morphology appeared modern and paralleled the emergence of behavioral modernity as seen from the archaeological record.
And then they talk about this in terms of these three phases, but with, you know, this is just focusing on the globularization of the brain, which I would specifically in addition to the face shape changes associate with developmental delay.
They say it is intriguing that the evolutionary brain globularization and homo sapiens parallels the emergence of behavioral modernity documented by the archaeological record.
First, the emergence of the Middle Stone Age is close in time to the currently earliest known fossils of early homo sapiens that had large brains but did not exhibit any major changes to outer brain morphology.
Second, as the homo sapiens brain gradually became more globular features of behavioral modernity accumulated gradually with time.
Third, at the time when brain globularity of our ancestors fell within the range of variation of present day humans, the full set of features of behavioral modernity had accumulated at the transition from the middle to the later Stone Age in Africa and from the middle to the upper paleolithic in Europe around 50 to 40,000 years ago.
So yeah, I guess that is something to note. You'll see the globularization continues and then there's some other morphology changes that happened even more recently, although we have to like about 50,000 years ago.
But you'll see different things stated in different papers where some people will kind of accept that by about 100,000 years ago, again, the globularity of the endocast that we have from fossil crania more or less approximate the modern range of variation.
And so a rounded head is one of the many correlated anatomical traits of the domestication syndrome.
And so I think that we could in general imagine that this would be this would reflect a developmental change such that whatever the time to adulthood was at this point in the journey of homo sapiens.
Because certainly there had been aspects of the domestication syndrome at work for much, much greater timescales, right?
The fact that the ratio of male to female body sizes or sexual dimorphism so radically diminishes from our Australopithecus ancestors who had body size sex ratios like gorillas.
I probably had like a harem system with all the violence and dominance and coercion that implies.
We underwent a long process of neotenization of many different traits at many different times, but certainly a big rounded head.
I mean, this is still true if you look at the distinction between human babies and human adults.
But yeah, a large rounded head, classic domestication syndrome trait.
And so for 300,000 years, our brains had about the same size, but they got more and more rounded, right?
Indicating that whatever like time to maturity was for humans, whether that really changed or not.
As we mentioned in the last episode with that paper on brain gene expression profile, neotenization.
This is the most neotenous trait of the human species.
When we compare ourselves to other animals, the brain gene expression curves, producing the synapses, this is like the continuation of that production,
the gene expression of genes that are involved in synapse production just continues way, way like a radically greater proportion with respect to other species than any other trait is prolonged.
So, you know, what we should expect is that there's just the brain globularization, our heads getting rounder, corresponds to greater and greater and greater neural density,
greater and greater and greater interconnectivity within and between brain regions.
And then this other thing that happens where our cerebellums get bigger and also our, yeah, our parietal area bulges up and our temporal lobes kind of undergo a reshaping.
I don't know what that means, but it is really so remarkable if you look at the, if you look at a neanderthal, you know, a reconstructed brain from the endocast,
you know, from a cast taken from the inside of a cranium of a neanderthal compared to a human.
Yeah, it is really different and, you know, our cerebellums like really beefed up, they really bulked out.
And then this parietal area does a bunch of interesting stuff.
And what's kind of fascinating about this, this is once again getting into the, you know, developmental change as evolutionary change and understanding like the specifics,
like being able to use the differences between species in terms of their life cycles and the sort of like timing and character of their development as a very, very good indication of the evolutionary divergences between them.
Because some of this shape change happens perinatally.
It happens, you know, in the brief interval after birth.
And we talked about this once before and I believe it was that episode oxytocin atrocities way back in the day.
It's a proper 2020 or 2021 stuff.
But yeah, 2021.
But yeah, yeah, you know, so here's here's another like quick summary of some of these changes from geologically older to younger Homo sapiens, the frontal area becomes taller.
The parietal areas bulge, the sidewalls become parallel and the occipital area becomes rounder and less overhanging.
Moreover, the cerebellum becomes relatively larger and more bulging the cranial base more flexed and the temporal poles narrower and oriented anterior medially.
But so yeah, this this parietal shape change we talked about in terms of we read from a paper called the Precuneus expansion.
I think that's how you pronounce it.
But this is the change that is subsequent to the emergence of Homo sapiens, but precedes the, you know, the shift in our frontal areas that corresponds to the juvenileization of our faces, the reduction in our face size,
and corresponds in time to this final threshold of cognitive modernity about 100,000 years ago.
And this is in between the advent of Homo sapiens and the advent of modern Homo sapiens.
But this this parietal change the Precuneus is part of the parietal lobe.
And the parietal region in general is it's thought that the Precuneus is changing in shape such that it's responsible for a fair amount of the parietal bulging.
Although other other aspects other parts of the parietal region are also beefing up.
But the parietal region is really interesting because it it's like people didn't like to talk about it in evolutionary theory very much for a long time because it's so they like it when a brain region does something really specific so that they can say like it just feels
more scientific or whatever and more insightful to be like this is an area involved in planning and also motivation and reward and also hunger or whatever.
Like a lot of the time the list of traits that are associated with brain regions gets awfully long and starts to feel a little confounding on its own terms.
But the best way to think of what it does is that it's a center of integration integration of information from the outside with bodily information integration of information that is being processed in all the other brain regions integration
right so you can see how this is awfully salient to the you know the overall tendencies that we're examining in the advent of cognitive modernity.
So this is from a paper called Evolving Human Brains Paleoneurology in the Fate of Middle Pleistocene published in 2020.
And what he says is parietal lobes are formed by association areas that are crucial to many distinct integrative functions.
They have many internal folds blurred anatomical boundaries and a noticeable morphological diversity among primates.
All these factors make them more difficult to study in comparative and experimental neurobiology when compared with other cortical regions.
And accordingly their possible role in cognition and evolution were rather neglected in the past century.
And so while emphasizing this just truly broad theme of integration in general this author and many others.
I read more papers about this than any anything else although I certainly won't quote them all.
This author really emphasizes you know these specific acts of integration that would be useful for tool use and for sociality that involve sort of like extensions of bodily cognition.
Right so in the one sense you know body centered cognition that involves sort of like empathetic experiences of other people allowing for certain types of social interaction.
Right feeling other people's experience in your own body like you know extending yourself to others.
But also what he calls a prosthetic cognition with respect to tool use.
You know we know from brain scans that we experience things that are we're manipulating in our hands and whatnot as parts of our body.
And you know I talked about this with respect in the biophobia and its consequences draft book chapter that I just put on the internet.
I talked about you know a hypothetical evolutionary argument against people being able to drive.
Right you know as an example of the types of reasoning people engage in to talk about how different social arrangements are impossible because of evolution or whatever.
How you know we actually were perfectly aware that we use evolutionary capacities that evolved under really specific circumstances to do novel things all the time.
And you know but part of the reason that we can do that in that specific case is because we experience cars as an extension of our body.
I've been aware of that for a long time before I actually read about it anywhere.
But yeah yeah so you know he talks about how we integrate the tools and whatnot into our sense of self.
And how this sort of again talking about these feedback loops these different areas of cognition and these different dimensions of sociality and ecology.
All kind of like interacting with each other but so he also says he talks about how sub regions of the parietal lobes are involved in language comprehension.
Hand-eye coordination you know and the parts involved in hand-eye coordination are definitely larger and more complex in humans than in other primates and are directly involved in tool use.
He says the precuneus is a bridge between body inputs somatosensory cortex and visual inputs occipital cortex and it integrates body and environment at physical chronological and social levels.
And is involved in visual imaging and simulation memory retrieval and visiospatial integration.
And he talks about he says all these parietal regions have connections with many cortical and sub cortical areas but are particularly connected with the prefrontal cortex.
Right so here we can kind of like if we were going to summarize like okay what are the brain structure changes.
We had brains that were about as big actually Neanderthals reached a greater encephalization quotient than homo sapiens.
You know so if we were going to say like what are these structural differences that characterized us in you know just like very concisely.
We would probably say well you know despite the whatever the relative sizes we probably had a you know greater neural density probably overall but you know certainly in particular key regions a product of a neotenization of gene expression.
And we probably had a more developed you know a larger relative to overall brain size a larger parietal region that was more interconnected with a prefrontal cortex that had a greater neuron density.
That would really be like the essence of it right those would probably be the like the core sort of fundamental neurological distinctions between ourselves and Neanderthals and other homo species that allowed us to end up being in the position that we are in today.
This author further says in general you know continuing on with the parietal cortex I just thought that was a good moment to be like well there are pretty much is right.
Now we see these connections between these two regions that are particularly involved in human cognitive uniqueness compared to other hominins.
But yeah so continuing on about the parietal cortex he says in general we can state that the parietal cortex is particularly involved in functions associated with the management of the relationships between brain body and environment.
And it supplies a global workspace for consciousness self perception and auto noesis.
He talks about how tools are he says tools are sensed as part of the body when handled extending the somatosensory capacity beyond the body as part of the brain's body schemes.
I just have to read this paragraph and you'll see why at the very end.
According to the paleo neurological evidence Neanderthals and early modern humans can represent a first degree of body tool specialization because of their partial parietal development while late modern humans could have evolved an additional complexity of the body tool cognition as suggested by the further expansion of their parietal cortex.
In this case although it can be statistically hard to detect behavioral differences between early and late Homo sapiens the different degrees of parietal expansion can witness actual differences in the general Visio spatial capacities.
In all cases it is apparent that after the middle Pleistocene in quotes something happens in this sense.
There you have it friends we said at the beginning of the episode that about 100,000 years ago something happens and there it is.
Yeah so he's basically saying technology is a constituent part of cognition there's another direct quote and so just let me read from one last paragraph on the neurobiological evidence.
I think that's kind of all we really need to do he says interestingly the parietal cortex and body cognition are also involved in social processes once again getting into those feedback loops.
In fact body centered metrics and simulations are central to the management of the social environment that is the physical chronological mnemonic and social spaces are handled according to similar visual and body based principles and mechanisms.
Moreover the size of the association cortex and primates is proportional to the size of the social groups.
And hence we must expect that the parietal expansion and Neanderthals and most of all in modern humans was likely associated with changes in their social system.
Technical and social environments are tightly associated because of shared factors involving neural plasticity, visiospatial cognition and cultural transmission and differences in these two aspects can be actually outstanding when comparing modern humans and Neanderthals.
In both species the increase of the social group size as suggested by larger brains and the migration towards higher latitudes which are characterized by a reduction of the energetic resources could have required the organization of fission fusion societies based on splitting and
re-aggregation of the social networks to regulate the demographic density. In modern humans such social changes may have been further integrated by a reduction of aggressive behaviors and an increase of cooperative activities through self domestication.
Finally it must be also mentioned that the parietal lobes in particular the precuneus are involved in mind reading and mentalization.
So there we see that just that fabulous fusion of all these different elements right the social the technological the you know it's just all coming together this overarching theme of integration.
And yeah, you know, I really think that we could even go a little farther than this and say that this kind of like this body centered cognition that this author is talking about being responsible for administering our experiences of
duality and you know like maintaining and navigating social relationships on the one hand and technological capacities on the other and environmental interactions and like our perceptions of the landscape and whatnot.
You know, we could like kind of extend that out he doesn't explicitly say it but you know I think that there's really something to be said for the notion that we use a kind of body centered cognition to
experience our environments in general that when we look at a mountain. We really do feel like we're part of it in some sense like our ability to examine it and to understand it in detail and to map it out in some way to remember different
paths up and down it, or whatever is partially a result of our ability to project ourselves on to the mount to conceptualize our bodies as a map of the mountain, and to, you know, to think of the peak as a part, you know, as a place on in our own,
you know, sort of like corporeal like our map of ourselves, right and to think of, you know, a river running down in some kind of like corporeal in some manner as a form of self conceptualization.
And yeah, so in this, in this regard, you know, I think like when we, when we look up at the stars, and we, you know, think about how the stars might have formed, we, we imagine bodily states in order to conceptualize these processes
whereby the stars might have formed. And when we imagine that the stars might fall out of the sky, we, you know, have some kind of integrated bodily experience of imagining ourselves falling out of the sky, or ourselves exploding into supernovae.
I think we use a map of ourselves to sort of experience the world in general and everybody in it. Right. And so that in a sense is kind of how, you know, like the earth first type of my youth, you know, of being the earth defending itself is I think actually just very concrete expression of something we literally
literally experience, you know, as, as is all of the many, many accounts in, you know, the entirety of the landscape of what we might call like descriptions of mystical experiences, or you know, descriptions of the shamanic
experience. I think that these all involve just variations on experiencing some unity with what's ostensibly external, because the way that we even perceive and comprehend it is by projecting, you know, is by using brain regions that are also involved in our own bodily cognition, and, you know, utilizing that
same capacity that allows us to experience a wrench as part of our bodies to like look at the sky and look at mountains and think about what they are. And yeah, you know, and so that also has this other, this other implication, right, as is so often the case, the capacities
that are most beautiful in humanity are also the ones with so much potential for ugliness. I think that's also exactly what gives us the ability to look at a mountain and think, oh, we could blow the top off that mountain and then get all the coal out from inside of it.
Right, you know, like that, that capacity for bodily extension also allows us to treat the whole world like a tool, you know. But, but yeah, so that's, that's my account of the neural changes that fundamentally made us human, an increase in neuron density, a bulging of the cerebellum, but in particular the parietal lobe,
and a greater sort of just like overall coordination between the prefrontal cortex and the parietal regions, you know, promoting these characteristic human qualities like cognitive plasticity, tool use, social integration, right, you know, just like symbolism,
all that good stuff that we think of as characteristically human. I think that really there it is, like, you know, in comparison to other hominin species.
And, you know, and it turns out that it has like pretty interesting implications for some of the more like heightened states that we enter where we feel one with the world, I think that's just kind of literally what happens sometimes.
So he basically viewed animals as machines that they have no consciousness at all, which I think is a very strange view. And so in Descartes' view, then animals don't have souls, humans have souls.
Okay, so I promised some mind blowing evolutionary theory that there we are with our thesis about the nature of dot dot dot what happened and the transition to cognitive and behavioral modernity.
But I want to add some fundamentals of the biology of developmental plasticity that would have allowed this to happen. And this is some, I think, pretty interesting stuff.
So let's go back to that paper that I based so much of last episode on human brain evolution transcripts metabolites and their regulators, where, you know, which I used to make the point that gene expression changes drive so much of evolution and that behavior and
genes directly drive gene expression changes ergo there are choices to be made about our evolutionary trajectory. You know, and they had this graph in in this paper, where they're comparing they're looking at mean cranial volume of various species as we emerge you
know, compared against time compared against the, you know, the emergence of different technologies and cultural traits on the temporal axis. But then there's another axis also associated with time that is just the emergence because now we have the, you know, the paleogenetics
kind of stuff. It's the emergence of different gene mutations. Okay, so it's not like it was only gene expression changes of genes that we shared in common with our, you know, our last ancestor in common with chimpanzees and bonobos that
changed, you know, we did in fact, you know, undergo some gene sequence changes, many of which had no functional consequences, but some of which absolutely did. What's so interesting about this list, there's six that they mentioned in all over the course of four million years or
so to our mutations of Fox P2, which is probably the only one anybody's likely to have heard of, centrally implicated in language, right? One of these mutations we share with Neanderthals, one of them is after split with Neanderthals, it's very recent. But what's
interesting here is that I don't think there's a single exception. All of these, I mean, Fox P2 is a, is itself a transcription factor, right? It involves, it helps, it helps us, you know, determine the magnitude of the
transcription of other genes. And in, I think every single other case, these other, these four other mutations are going to be things that nobody's heard of. Their putative effects are in encephalization, increased signal
processing, cortical expansion, and delayed synaptogenesis, right? The eotanus synapse gene expression profiles that we talked about so much. But all of them have something to do with the regulation of gene expression, right? So what I'm trying to say here is that there's this
interesting thing where on the one hand what drove so much of our evolution are, you know, changes in gene expression, as opposed to gene sequences, but then the gene sequences that changed were in genes that regulate gene expression. And isn't that a hell of a thing, right? You know, it's like, that's what, that's okay, so that's what a whole lot of genes do. But that's not how we so typically think of genes, we
so typically think of genes as coding for a trait in some way that, you know, nobody really wants to talk about too concretely. It's like, let's just kind of assume that, you know, we don't have to, you know, we don't have to get mired in the details of all this
and that just somehow some gene just does a thing, you know, and it just maps directly to a trait. But what genes do is they regulate development in so many cases, there's like, there's no way, it's like, we'll use the phrase development will be like, yeah, and it affects how a trait develops it, you know, but
we don't really like think about the actual developmental process and the myriad complex interactions that are happening to guide it. And, you know, so this is so interesting, because here we have to think about just like the whole logic that's at work in, in how we, how we think about how evolution works in standard evolutionary
theory, right, which is just that like, okay, you know, the like the genes just randomly make copying errors sometimes and it could be for absolutely anything. And if it just happens to be the case that a gene produces a fortuitous copying error, then there has to be this whole reproductive
differential that happens, right? Then that has to be, it has to be so sufficient that whatever other massive forms of variation are occurring in a population, it's so significant that it drives a signal like a huge reproductive differential. And so like the gene eventually spreads and
whatever trait it confers spreads throughout a population. And so it's like the mutation producing any interesting or worthwhile trait in and of itself is like one statistical miracle. But then the fact that it just happens to be like the thing that lines up with whatever
evolutionary journey a species is on already is just like, you know, statistical miracle times statistical miracle to the power of three or four fucking statistical miracles on top of a goddamn pile of statistical miracles, right? I mean, that is a hell of a coincidence.
And yeah, you know, I mean, just like think about all the other things other than these mutations that they talk about in this sequence that could have happened and like, you know, what would they have done, but but somehow. And so yeah, here is from
for it's just like, first of all, not how evolution works, and we'll read from West ever hearts, developmental plasticity and evolution to make that case. But then we'll talk about the actual sort of like statistical improbability of mutations supporting developmental
change in a necessary direction, given a species evolutionary trajectory in the first place, through a book that integrates quantum theory and evolution, but is just, we'll look at a bunch of papers at sites that are just from good old fashioned, you know, laboratory
experiments on evolution. Yeah, so this is from West ever hearts genes as followers and evolution. And this is just making a point that I've made myself a bunch of times, but I think it might help, you know, to have rather than me just ranting
about this to have somebody with letters after their name saying in a book that was published by Oxford University Press so from from the chapter adaptive evolution from a section called genes as followers and evolution, certain conventional ideas about adaptive
evolution have to change. First, genetic novelty is not necessary for phenotypic novelty to evolve. phenotypic innovation does not await mutation. Contrary to the probably common belief that a phenotype of mutational origin has more evolutionary potential, then doesn't
environmentally induced trade, there are several compelling reasons to argue the reverse. Okay, so that's just exactly what I just said, right, and it's this thing that I say over and over again, always using the standard phrasing, you know, we have to disabuse ourselves of this notion that the way evolution
happens as we just have to wait around for random fortuitous gene sequence mutations, right. She's saying that's not what happens. She goes on to say an environmental factor can immediately affect many individuals in a population at once, whereas a mutation initially affects only one individual widespread induction
improves the likelihood one that the innovation will be selectively advantageous and at least some individuals and two that will be tested in a variety of genetic backgrounds, beginning the process of genetic accommodation of the conditions of its expression in its form and reducing
deleterious side effects. Environmentally induced traits are relatively immune to elimination by natural selection compared with mutationally induced ones, and therefore more likely to persist despite initial costs, raising the probability of favorable genetic accommodation under selection.
If the arguments of this chapter are correct, most phenotypic evolution begins with environmentally initiated phenotypic change, and even when the initiation of novelty is mutational, much of the subsequent gene frequency change represents genetic accommodation, which does not depend on mutation, but can capitalize upon any influential mutations that occur.
The leading event is a phenotypic change with particular, sometimes extensive effects on development. Gene frequency change follows as a response to the developmental change. In this framework, most adaptive evolution is accommodation of developmental phenotypic change.
Genes are followers, not necessarily leaders in phenotypic evolution.
So you can think here about the phrasing that I just developed, this concept of the vocabulary of temperaments, this idea that there's a broader range of potential traits that are kind of like latent in a species than any you see expressed at any given time.
She's kind of talking about that in terms broader than just with temperament, but with anatomy, with whatever, how it's possible for developmental change to bring out a whole new form for an organism, a whole new behavioral mode, whatever it is.
And then if it's advantageous, there will be genetic change that makes it more likely to continue. Some of that will be the kind of gene expression changes that we're talking about, but there will also be, as she's saying, gene sequence changes.
And so a little bit more here. This conclusion about the role of genetic change is pivotal for a synthesis of development and evolution.
The idea that genes can directly code for complex structures has been one of the most remarkably persistent misconceptions in modern biology.
The reason is that no substitute idea for the role of genes has been proposed that would consistently tie genes both to the visible phenotype and to selection, if not by coding for a selected structure, then how?
The answer lies in the collective actions of multiple genes on the fine tuning of developmental change. Complex structure emerges from complex change of genetic and environmental interaction with the phenotype.
The ability of genes to adjust complex structure comes from their large numbers, the precision of their effects, and their condition sensitivity in exerting those effects.
And another way that we can see that this has to be true is when we look at trait variation, individual variation in the human population or whatever, and we search for genetic corollaries, we find that all traits of any real interest, anything we can think to name is massively heritable.
But then when we start looking for the alcoholism gene or the adventurousness gene or whatever, we find two things.
One is that all of these traits of interest are massively polygenic. There are many, many, many genes at work in affecting the variation that we find in the human population with these traits.
And we also find, dear friends, that any given gene tends to be very pleotropic, that it tends to affect many traits at once.
You can see how this would have pretty catastrophic implications for all that Richard Dawkins game theory fucking babble about a gene for altruism competing with a gene for cheating, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, right?
None of that stuff is real, right? Because any putative competition you would try to model between any two genes ostensibly for a trait, you would have to be able to model competitions between the relative fitness payoffs of every other trait, the gene effects, as well as every trait that every gene that affects a given trait is also interacting with.
I mean, it would just be this insane network. It's just not real, but it is so persistent, right?
West Eberhard wrote this book in 2003 and it's not like she was racing to the presses with some like totally new, you know, experimental result or something like that.
As I described in the revolutionary biology series, this, you know, like really was Cold War ideology that tended to like really diminish the acceptability of studying the biology of developmental plasticity, you know, these like camps essentially formed.
And if you wanted to talk about plasticity, you were in like the Lysenko Soviet, you know, the communist camp, right?
And so if you wanted to talk about, you know, he's just hilariously like American ways to think about, you know, like these bizarrely hyper individualistic, like capitalist ways to think about genes as like utterly modular, like the gene is the unit of selection somehow.
Like it's not like the whole organism that manages to live or die. Like genes are the units of selection and they're totally discreet and they just like discreetly code for whole traits that fight wars with each other.
It's just, it's so insane. You know, but this is very much in keeping with, you know, something like this happened. If you read widely across like a range of scientific disciplines, you'll find a whole lot of this stuff over and over again.
You know, it's like cultural relativism suffered some setbacks after the atrocities of World War Two or like the way people studied the domestication of horses really changed after World War Two.
Like, you know, whatever. But so to make this concrete to give an example from West Eberhard that I think dovetails very nicely with the cognitive evolutionary examples from last episode and this one.
Here's, here's her talking about dwarf elephants. So she's talking about, you know, how actually a wide range of animals, not just elephants end up having like a dwarf form on islands.
You know, so once again, this is not because randomly, you know, gene sequence mutations for small body size just happened to show up in populations that were on islands.
Miracle of miracles. And then, you know, the smaller animals with the small body genes out, you know, outmoded the big animals or whatever.
She says dwarfism of fossil elephants found on islands off California, Southeast Asia and the Mediterranean likely other distinctive small size to environmentally initiated stunting and selection that favored reproduction at small juvenile size in a place where food resources were
extremely restricted, in effect, leading to the genetic accommodation of stunting.
Okay, so you see what happened there and how it's similar to, especially in last episode, what we were talking about with like you pushing yourself to the limits of your cognitive ability, and it's inducing gene expression changes.
And then those gene expression changes are being accommodated in gene sequence changes like the Fox P2 mutation and these other mutations we talked about, right?
So it's like elephants go through this food stress on islands because islands aren't big and they don't have a lot of resources, right?
And so they experience nutritional limitations and that changes their gene expression and their behavior, their gene expression and metabolism, and they get smaller and then they experience gene sequence change that accommodates that small size.
So then if you took a dwarf elephant and brought it somewhere with a whole bunch of food, it wouldn't necessarily immediately change, right?
Because it would have undergone a process of, as she puts it, genetic accommodation.
Okay, so now this thing that I've ranted about so often has also been said by somebody with letters after their name, right?
So we have some basis for validating this thing I keep coming back to that we have to stop thinking about evolution as emerging from random just like insanely fortuitous coincidences in changes in gene sequence.
But we're still left with this same, we still have this sort of like statistical miracle at work.
It's just the nature of it has changed.
Like we're acknowledging that it is like directed that it comes about in response to changes that originate from, you know, developmental shifts in response to the environment in response to behavior in response to doing things like thinking about something that's at the very like margins of your symbolic capacities.
But still how the hell do these mutations happen in such a fortuitous manner?
Because we all know, right, that the whole reason that evolutionary theory works and is scientifically credible and whatever else is that, you know, the theory is that genes sequences randomly mutate and they produce effects in the phenotype that are subject to natural selection.
And so that, you know, that selection that variable reproduction and survival, it provides the feedback to the genetic system that allows for mutations to persist and accumulate and, you know, develop new traits, right?
And that's, that's like why we think that's why it accords with our understanding of the world, right, is because there's nothing spooky happening.
But there is.
And so this is from a book called Quantum Evolution, The New Science of Life, because that notion is simply wrong.
And he says, a third problem for the standard evolutionary theory is the apparent existence of a heretical type of mutation.
Standard neo-Darwinian evolutionary theory predicts that mutations occur randomly with no respect to the direction of evolutionary change.
Natural selection provides the direction of evolution by selecting hosts with beneficial mutations, but those mutations are generated randomly.
This does not mean that all sites in DNA have the same mutation rate.
In fact, we know that there are regions, most chromosomes that are highly mutable probably due to their local chemical environment or because they bind mutation promoting proteins.
However, it does mean that the mechanism that introduced mutations into DNA are presumed not to know which bases are likely to generate advantageous mutations if they mutate.
And nonetheless, when John Cairns of the Harvard School of Public Health in Boston set out to test this reasonable premise, he found things were not quite so simple.
And so he talks about how this was the first of what turned out to be quite a few studies that found this.
He naturally was using E. coli, because this is not always how it is.
But yeah, he used an E. coli strain that couldn't metabolize lactose.
It lacked an enzyme called beta-galactosidase.
And he fed a substrate with tons of lactose.
So if it could somehow miraculously develop the mutation necessary to metabolize lactose, it would be on its way to flourishing.
But otherwise, it was right on the brink of starving.
And what he found was that the mutations that E. coli underwent in his experimental population were statistically hugely, hugely biased, like way beyond the probability thresholds of statistical significance
towards advantageous mutations to allow the E. coli to metabolize lactose.
And yeah, so what does he say?
Karen's paper describing adaptive mutations was published in Nature in 1988 on leashing a storm of controversy.
The difficulty was that there was no known mechanism which could allow the environment of a living cell to influence the targeting of DNA mutations.
The direction of information flow in the cell is from DNA through RNA to protein and outwards to the environment.
There is currently no known mechanisms by which information can flow backwards from the environment to DNA to account for these mutations.
And that remains the case. There's no known mechanism.
Just like there's no known mechanism for the generation of the universe spontaneously from nothing.
But here we are, right?
And yeah, so this has been replicated a huge number of times.
There's been a lot of dialogue about it, but I'll put a paper in the bibliography that is much more recently.
In addition to the book and Karen's paper, I'll put a paper in the bibliography that was published just a few years ago because experiments of this nature now just take this for granted.
And this is so often the case in the academy, especially where there's some kind of deep psychological attachment or some temperamental worldview-motivated reason for hanging on to one theory over another.
What you get so often when scientific results accumulate indicating an unequivocal divergence from established doctrine is it's not like there's ever a ceremony to establish that one team was right and one team was wrong.
It's not like there's ever an official declaration that there's going to be a divergence of factions or anything, but that is what happens.
There's a simple bifurcation, right? You see this in the social sciences with regard to the mere existence of human behavioral biology, right?
Is there such a thing as human nature?
You know, this was never a real question and it's been answered affirmatively over and over and over and over again throughout, you know, a good like century and a half at this point of interminable dialogue.
But it's kind of just like at this point there's just factions, right?
It's never like social constructivist anthropology is just going to like decide to give up or it doesn't seem likely to anytime soon, right?
And the people who want to get something done have just kind of stopped trying to have the conversation at least nearly as frequently.
It's not like in the 20th century where there are these constant nature-nurture debates.
You know, I just wrote about this in that book, Chapter of Biophobia and its consequences that you can find online if you want.
But yeah, you know, it's like this is the same kind of thing where the vast majority of like conventional evolutionary theory just is still totally not on board with this.
If you call it Richard Dawkins or whoever and you're like, is it true that genes can actually mutate like to produce fortuitous traits?
Like in response to their environmental conditions, you know, he just say absolutely not and that's not scientific.
And the only way to be scientific is to have a machine metaphor that you use to describe everything in the universe.
Even if you happen to be talking about things that emphatically aren't machines, you know, and even if the explanation really isn't one,
even if the explanation is just, oh, it's just like a whole clusterfuck of statistical miracles.
It's like an orgy of statistical miracles up in here, you know, like that's the explanation, right?
It's actually really like so much less, it's so much more of an explanation to say, no, there's actually some reason that these things happen.
It's just one we don't know about yet.
But that realm of science that is actually concerned with doing this kind of experimental work has just stopped having the debate and they just understand that this is true, right?
And so this is that realm of like synthetic biology or any kind of experimental undertaking that involves, you know, like laboratory directed evolution.
And so often it's of precisely the variety of that 1988 John Karen's experiment where you're using something called a chemostat.
So the paper that I'll put in the bibliography is very recent and the title is something like counter-intuitive or non-intuitive aspects of chemostat experiments.
The chemostat is an environment in which you're trying to teach an organism to metabolize something it hasn't previously been able to.
And the way that you get it to do that is you put it in an environment with like a starvation level diet of something it is able to metabolize and then a hyperabundance of something that it needs a few mutations to be able to use as a food.
And, you know, the results if you're using the machine metaphor version of DNA sequence mutations are counter-intuitive indeed because it says that basically you'll get advantageous mutations within a couple generations.
And they're just not having the debate anymore, right? They're just getting their work done.
And whatever that means, whatever the grand implications are, and however much the people who write the evolutionary theory books, you know, however much the like Stephen Pinkers of the world, you know, just like our super, super not be willing to accommodate this reality, it's reality, right?
And yeah, so they're just kind of doing their thing. But yeah, yeah, I will go into this in far greater detail in future podcasts. This will be a central theme of some work I'm starting that I'll be talking about soon.
I think that there's a real need for revolutionary politics to kind of get down with technological thresholds that have to do with life, like to get away from the sort of like resource extraction and machine orientation to the not the notion of like technological and cultural
progress and get into the more like biocentric version of that. So yeah, there'll be more about that soon. But that's the hopefully hopefully I don't disappoint when I say like that, you know, obviously, we don't know, we don't know why this happens.
I think this has something to do with the very, you know, the very reality of what life fundamentally is, you know, whatever. There's there's something about it that's unlike inanimate matter, there's something about it that seems to be like what it
character what characterizes it is a sort of will a, you know, a tendency to go to
perform actions that are contrary to what inert matter would do under prevailing environmental conditions right to go uphill when everything else wants to roll downhill to swim upstream right to grow towards the sun instead of falling to the earth of gravity, whatever.
Right. And so I think that we just have to that that visible property that a child would use to distinguish life from non living phenomenon right that is so absent in the the formal definitions of life as like, you know, self replicating chemical processes that take place in water blah blah blah blah blah blah.
You know, like that visible quality that it has that registers to us perceptually, because we could just say that's also happening at the molecular level, whatever that means, you know, like ultimately, it's like, Well, how could that be true in a universe that's fundamentally mechanical and the answer is that it isn't life isn't this life isn't this crazy
thing that doesn't make sense, given the conditions of like the fundamental nature of the world we inhabit. It's not the statistical miracle within a miracle within a miracle that supposedly constitutes an explanation.
That's a ridiculous explanation. That's a that's an insane creation in many respects. The universe itself is alive in this way right that this property, whatever this is that is this essence of life is something that is fundamentally imbued in the dynamics of the reality we inhabit.
Perhaps as this book quantum evolution posits, perhaps evident in the behavior of the very smallest particles that we can observe, and the fact that when you get right down to it, when you try to apply deterministic behavioral models to them, they simply refuse and they do something that looks very much like making choices about how they want to behave, right, you know, the whole
electron like double slit experiment stuff, all that, where as much as physicists try not to use this type of language, they really can't avoid the word choice in their descriptions of how the smallest constituents of matter behave.
I don't know. Okay, so anyway, hopefully I didn't disappoint in my claim that this particular piece of the biology of developmental plasticity is kind of particularly, you know, mind blowing or interesting or a cause for a sort of general existential reflection or whatever on to our final phase.
So he basically viewed animals as machines that they have no consciousness at all, which I think is a very strange view. And so in Descartes' view, then animals don't have souls, humans don't have souls.
Okay. So I think looking here at, I mean, it'll contract a little bit, but looking here at my six hour of recorded audio, I probably should break this up into I'll do a thing where it's like 64.12 and three or something.
But we, you know, so here we are, you know, we've examined, here we are at cognitive and behavioral modernity, and we've even managed to examine some of the mind blowing evolutionary realities that facilitated our journey here.
But I think we would be remiss if we didn't just briefly describe the subsequent cultures in Africa a little bit and how this lack of that sort of like collapse dynamic, the flickering on and off of various aspects of cultural complexity has the very concrete implication that cultures
managed to persist and that there is really some argument to be made for the continuity of some extant hunter gatherer populations in Africa and some very ancient cultures that show up in the archaeological record that are, you know, really archaeological celebrities unto themselves.
That at a time before we had so much of the data that we now possess, you know, these cultures were very often sort of identified with, you know, not just the advent of cognitive modernity in general, but, you know, it was kind of assumed, you know, a lot of these abrupt thresholds that I spent so much time
talking about the non-existence of were posited to be associated with these cultures. Right, people would be like this is where language started, this was the beginning of symbolic abstraction, et cetera, et cetera.
So I speak, of course, of two Southern African archaeological cultures, the Still Bay from 76 to 71,000 years ago, there about in the Hoheeson's Port, you know, about 66 to 59,000 years ago, and these cultures, you know, so the HP is sort of like the direct successor to the SB,
and what's interesting is like I said, you know, here is where we get out of this dynamic of collapse that probably had a bunch of things, you know, a bunch of underlying causes that could have been like excess environmental exploitation, changes in environmental conditions,
internal political struggles, the breakdown of larger scale regional networks, you know, like I don't know, I'm a strong advocate for persistent human use of fire going all the way back to like at least Homo erectus.
I don't really know when we actually managed to like start making fires, and maybe that is like a really central thing that, you know, that changed when dot dot dot something happened.
Who knows, I think it probably happened earlier than that. It might seem counterintuitive if you've ever like taken a primitive skills class and, you know, learned how to make a fire with like a bow drill or whatever, you know, you might really feel like, well, this is fucking idiosyncratic,
like it's hard to imagine people just coming up with this, but probably how people gained the ability to ignite fires initially was in, you know, by hitting rocks against rock, which they probably like noticed that like in the production of flaking,
you know, like percussion flaking arrowheads or spear points or whatever. That's produced sparks and that actually happens really fast. Like I had an experience where I was out on top like up on a mountain somewhere beneath the starry sky was somebody on a bunch of drugs and we spent all night drumming on dead trees and rocks with other dead trees and rocks,
you know, and when the rock on rock action would happen, you just have this like massive cascade of sparks, right? So it's something if you're in an environment and you're doing stuff with rocks, you'll, you'll see sooner or later.
And so that's probably where fire ignition began. But yeah, who knows, like who knows when that start like when people actually managed to translate that into making a fire.
So that could be, you know, it could be that one of the reasons there was so much collapse throughout so much of humanity's journey is because like those were the times the fires went out.
But whatever it was after this transition to cognitive modernity, we can see cases where things got harder, but there was no collapse.
There might have been a contraction just as there is in human history. And, you know, just as we're probably going to experience in our own lifetimes might have been like a contraction and like how sort of like elaborate culture was like in its degree of like ornamentation in the extent of its social
networks and like the distance at which it traded materials with other cultures, but it's not like a fundamental collapse where any truly essential cultural trade is lost.
And so we see that in the transition from still bay to Poison's Port. It's a, it's the case that the still bay like it's beautiful. The, you know, the spear points and the shell beads and the incised red ochre and the bone tools.
I mean, you look at that stuff and it's like just so exquisite. It really gives you this sense of like, oh yeah, that was definitely made by somebody who can do the same stuff as like the people who are all around me in Portland or Oregon today.
And the HP is considerably cruder in some ways, you know, because it's just like they are experiencing a very like a much harsher environment, but they don't lose anything in a truly fundamental sense.
You know, they still have their incised ostrich egg water containers, right? They still have all their fundamental cultural traits. And indeed, they actually are expanding in their ecological niches.
They're able to occupy a much wider range of landscapes than the still bay culture that preceded it. And, you know, to occupy in particular more arid lands, just like a more drier time, right? And so they really adapted to desert life in a way that, you know, hadn't really been the case nearly as much before in their cultural predecessors.
And, you know, it's like when you see some Kalahari foragers drinking out of an ostrich egg shell water container, you kind of get this feeling that there might be some continuity here. And that is actually pretty strongly suggested by a number of lines of evidence.
And it's interesting because it's actually, these lines of evidence actually apply kind of like generally to the extent African hunter gatherer populations like to all of them. You know, they have these pretty interesting similarities like click languages and poisoned arrows, but also some like conceptual similarities in their cultures,
some convergences in like ritual and cosmology. And so, you know, I know that I was unkind in my treatment of that paper, The Human Symbolic Revolution earlier, but one of its authors, Camilla Power wrote a couple of papers that I absolutely loved that I wanted to talk about in connection with this idea.
This is a brave thing. I feel like anthropologists, I wish that they did more of this. It was definitely true that in, you know, the earlier phases of cultural anthropology, there was an absolute mania for reconstructed cosmologies, worldviews, religions, myths, right?
You know, and so if you want to read, if you want to dive into just the total deep end of that method, you know, it'd be like this like really fast and loose game of the comparative method where they're just like, look at tendencies distributed all over the place and be like, well, I think these all derive from some prototypical formulation that goes a little something like this.
And if you want to just dive into the total deep end of that style of anthropological reconstruction of putative, you know, ancestral cultural forms.
The James Frazier book, The Golden Bough is just this incredible journey through, you know, a prototypical, a reconstructed proto-religion worldview set of rituals, whatever, that we're just supposedly kind of everywhere, you know, or I guess everywhere in Europe at some point in, you know, in the murky past.
It's certainly what Maria Gimbutas did with her like goddess thesis, although in a far more modest and kind of reasonable form, although I think she did ultimately significantly overplay her hand, which is too bad because that fact gets used to diminish the valid aspects of her work.
But yeah, so Camilla Power did this with in this paper, a chapter in a book called Human Origins, Contributions from Social Anthropology. She wrote a chapter called Reconstructing a Source Cosmology for African Hunter Gatherers.
And so she's talking about all of them, the existing hunter-gatherers, right? So that's the, you know, West to East, there's like these various populations of Central African rainforest foragers, you know, the Imbuti and all those folks, you know, the various pygmy populations, right?
And then in East Africa and Tanzania, you have the Hadza, who are neither rainforest nor desert foragers, you know, the biomass is somewhere in between, and they speak a click language and use poison arrows and all that good stuff.
And then of course, you have the most ethnographically famous people of all time, arguably, you know, down in the Kalahari, you've got the many Bushmen people or the San or however you want to talk about them.
But yeah, the genetic distance between these populations is considerable. It's probably been a little while since any of these populations were in direct contact.
There's good evidence that there was transfer of like some materials, like some prestige cultural objects, some ostrich egg beads, I mean egg shell beads rather, starting about 50,000 years ago and ending a little over 33,000 years ago.
And this corresponds pretty well between South Africa and East Africa, right? So between the homes of contemporary, you know, San people, Kalahari foragers and whatnot on one hand and Hadza people on the other.
And this corresponds pretty well with the genetic evidence. And, you know, so none of these populations, the Central African rainforest foragers from Westmost to Eastmost are probably separated by at least a couple like 20,000 years genetically, right?
So none, like there's good evidence that these populations throughout deep time, since the advent of cognitively modern humanity and, you know, like the set of traits that characterizes humans alive everywhere on the globe today, there was regional interconnectivity, right?
But that there hasn't been for just like tens of thousands of years. So if there were like significant shared traits, like really non trivially distinct traits that are present in all of these groups in the Central African rainforest foragers in the East African foragers and in the South African foragers, it would be a pretty strong
case for these being cultural survivals from way the fuck back when, and there are. And so, yeah, power talks about some of these. It's interesting. She, she talks about a, what was it an ethnom, no, a musicologist who who did this with with some of like the musical
characteristics of pygmy and Bushman music, you know, and so kind of using this triangulation method that you'll also see in like reconstructions of like Indo European language and mythology or whatever where it's like that's that idea if you find a feature that's present and not just two, but three distinct populations that are separated by
significant periods of time, then it probably reflects the presence of some prototypical form of that trait in like the ancestral population. Yeah, so in the case of this musicologist, he's talking about Eastern and Western pygmies and then the Bushman.
You know, the traits are this quote, highly characteristic interlocking, hocketing polyphonic singing style. Yeah, and so, you know, she starts there but then she goes into this pretty interesting list of other cultural traits, you know, social organization,
subsistence style, of course, you know, but but also stuff having to do with cosmology and ritual and religion. And it is very interesting. There are a bunch of like interesting sort of cosmological similarities, for instance, just just to give an example of how kind of like
idiosyncratic this get you know how like strangely specific this gets and when you know when you consider the separation how it does kind of feel like, okay, yeah, that's like weird enough that it probably is in a result of common dissent is like this similarity between these cultures of conceptualizing
menstruating women as like hunters and is like even these really similar phrases where like when a woman is first menstruating or girl or whatever, you know, they'll use these phrases, you know, like both in like Hadza and Kalahari culture,
or they'll be like, oh, she has shot her first zebra, or oh, she's shot her first Elend or whatever, right, you know, kind of uncanny.
And, you know, but what's probably most particularly interesting, and it gets into, you know, both like kind of mapping out the subjective experiential dimension of human evolution and how it has a whole lot to do.
And, you know, that that like tendency towards like greater and greater levels of symbolism being able to see things in terms of other things and being able to like experience greater and greater connections between brain regions.
And yeah, just just like have a greater overall fluidity of experience.
And actually, that reaches its height in whatever we want to call it the mystical experience or the shamanic experience or whatever, right, but like, ultimately, you know, these phases that of the human experience that have so many different names but that so many of us just kind of know,
whether we have to take drugs to get there or, you know, like, like, I definitely began life with absolutely zero interest in anything that might have been described as like a mystical state of awareness, but then over and over and over again, I had these experiences where I was like,
oh, okay, yeah, that's why there's such a thing as like rituals and shamans and myths, and that's why people take drugs and write, you know, the thunder perfect mind and all that business, right.
And like, okay, there's all that right where it's just like the ultimate, you know, like the terminal state of like the direction that human evolution has been tending towards is indeed one where one kind of is identifying with everything in the world,
and everything is absolutely fluid, right, everything is capable of transforming into everything else, right, it's this, that's what symbolism is, and that's what the kind of like mystical experiences like this ability to interconvert any given identity into any other identity.
And so like the most interesting shared feature of all of these cultures that seem to have some like elements of common descent from a time not that long after the advent of cognitive modernity.
You know, are these like rituals and these myths that are just like that absolutely emphasize fluidity us and these rituals that, you know, so it's like these myths that like kind of instantiate that notion of fluidity on like a grand cosmological scale like
there was a time when we all had animal heads, and when everything was inter, when every identity was inter convertible with every other identity, but then also on a social scale where social roles are challenged and reversed and power dynamics,
develop this great fluidity, right, which is the way like that is the fucking fundamental lesson to take from hunter gather anthropology in terms of how to mitigate the tendency towards hierarchy is to maintain a fluidity of relational dynamics and of power.
So to quote a few things from these couple papers by power from reconstructing a source cosmology for African hunter gathers. She talks about pygmy cosmology says this cosmology has the same kind of fluidity as the ambiguous Bushman collection of gods and quotes.
She talks about the ambiguous, you know, the contradictory fluid and ontologically ambiguous character of the trickster is also present in all of these cosmologies.
She says we should consider whether the vagueness ambiguity and incoherence so often commented on in Bushman religion can be seen as characteristic of all these forager cosmologies.
So she's describing, you know, just in general how you know that, like I said that that like cosmological level on which everything is utterly fluid and identities are inter convertible.
And, you know, on the social level, she talks about this convergence between central African, you know, pygmy rituals, and this has a ritual in which there's some kind of like charter myth about a reason that, you know, like,
men get to like have certain privileges or whatever. And then there's this kind of like reversal or antagonism of it in this other rituals. There's these specific rituals that are like men only or women only that seem to be this kind of pendulum like assertion of power by one social group against another over and over and over again.
Right. Again, this like, you know, this eternal fluidity preventing the institutionalization of any like true hierarchical form. And these rituals that involve women dressing up like men and taking on the roles of hunters and antagonizing men in various ways like attacking them ritually stealing from them, like ritually like tying them up, whatever.
And some of it is quite hilarious. It deserves more attention than I'm going to give it in at this point, because I have been recording for so long. But, you know, she talks about the pendulum of power now with one gender who guard their boundary with secrets now with the other group,
each one contesting the space and time and a to and fro periodic motion. Right. So it's just like fundamental fluidity at work and everything from how the universe is conceived to the dynamics of power in a given society at a given time.
And one last quote from another paper on some of these rituals, aspects of playful or dramatic performance in these gender rituals may explore diffuse or test the limits of tensions between the sexes.
This recalls the dance to gender contests and secret society context of the body, the negotiation of power during performance of Bacchus women's dances or the unfinished dialogue among the mom and jelly, I guess, producing a pendulum swing of power
from one sex to the other in this view hunter gather gender relations cannot be seen as static bodies in motion never allow that hierarchy floods the interpersonal field. Right. And so that's a that's a pretty good place to end it. But again, that's
Oh, and I should mention that in this case she's citing I mean she's citing Colin Turnbull, the classic ethnography of the forest people, but she's also citing finnigan quite a bit more than a finnigan.
But yeah, that's a good place to end it. And I think that again, that's just really one of the very concrete applications of this kind of anthropology to the formulation of societies that, you know, don't have the insidious power dynamics that are destroying everything of the society we currently inhabit.
And it's actually just like really fun to think about I, I made that one fictional episode the Raven politics of Tara incognita, trying to like concretely imagine the applications of these lessons about fluidity to like the dynamics of societies with, you know, fairly complex institutions and like some
degree of technology in that particular case I tried to imagine applications of like synthetic biology to allow for like a diffusion like a dispersal of the resources necessary for people to subsist right so it doesn't have that element of monopolizable resources that seems so central to acquisitions of hierarchical power.
You know, the, the, the fixed the whole basis of the, the terminology like immediate return for jurors or whatever it's like really about whether resources can be concentrated and in time and space and monopolized, you know, fixed in time and space.
And so we'll, we'll get into that a whole bunch more as this series culminates. But yeah, you know, I mean, I think it's like, it's really fun and interesting to think about what life would be like if we just did that more right there's absolutely no reason that in even in a society with like a bunch of relatively
complex roles, if we just changed that one thing where people cycled through more roles in a, you know, in a given lifetime if like, if you didn't just like build up a kitchen resume and then you were like well I guess I work in fucking kitchens forever or whatever
right. You didn't like do a bunch of like trenching and lay a bunch of electrical conduit and then get to that point where you're like well I guess what I'm going to do until it breaks my body and I get addicted to oxycontin and die in the gutters just dig trenches and lay electrical conduit right you
I mean, you can think about how like structures like when we talk about like structures like police forces, and people like sort of come up with these terminological refinements for things that start to sound an awful lot like a police force.
Again, it's like, you know, these fundamental differences where it's like well what if people didn't self select into police forces or what if their membership was profoundly fluid, you know, things like that.
This like, just like you can think of any institution, I mean not that I would want people to cycle through an institution that like enforce the laws that police departments enforce but right.
When you talk about like community defense factions or whatever, you know, but like with just there's so many ways that I think life would be so much just like fundamentally better, just like such a vastly improved adventure.
If we could just actually experience a greater I mean like why'd we develop all this capacity for infinite behavioral plasticity.
Not to fucking use it right like that's not like some weird utopian pipe dream I've been doing it my whole life like, you know, but I've had to like I've had to really fight against the prevailing social order to do it.
But there's absolutely no reason that you can't constantly be learning to do new things and inhabiting really kind of like fundamentally new identities like that really is what I've been doing for 44 years now.
And it's really fun, it's better than getting stuck one place for the rest of your life. And yeah, and I think that, you know, it would both be intrinsically quite awesome, like just quite a lot better than this other thing we're doing.
But I also think it would have this profound effect on the power dynamics we experience. If we all, I mean it would have like massive effects beyond like, first of all the actual fluidity of these institutions like the effects we would have on our society directly by cycling through institutions would be profound.
But also it would change us, we would see the world in very different ways, just like I was talking about how revolutionaries tend to have had experiences of like really different worlds in their developmental context or whatever like it would change us so much to just actually
experience a broader range of social niches and modes of relationality and all the rest that we would gain a greater capacity to consciously affect the evolution of ourselves and our societies by engaging in a greater fluidity of social forms.
That is the end of this podcast. Thank you so much, my beautiful friends for listening, and we will talk again actually quite soon. I've got some more stuff coming out really, really soon. Okay, goodbye.
However, this doesn't seem like it's going to be a problem for Elon Musk.
Apparently having things, finding things inside their bodies like implants and bits of technology.
What if we had complete freedom to test new body invasive technologies?
Substance dualism comes from that there are two different many other ways, but just to kind of summarize what the problem is that he sets up is he argues that the human person is essentially these two different substances.
Two very different substances, completely different substances, which is where the term substance dualism comes from.
That there are two different kinds of substances. One is a mental substance and the other is a physical substance.
And these two kinds of substances, we make it up to the human person. Now there are two very different kinds of things.
So a lot of questions. How can these two very different kinds of things essentially exist in totally different planes interact with each other at all?
And Descartes really didn't have a way to understand how the physical and mental interact at all.