Title: Seeds of the World Tree Programs of Revolutionary Biology and Evolutionary Politics
Episode #: 70
Episode ID: 13448961
Source: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/13448961-seeds-of-the-world-tree-programs-of-revolutionary-biology-and-evolutionary-politics.mp3
------------------------------------------------------------

=== EPISODE METADATA ===
Generated: 2026-01-12 01:02:05
Episode ID: 13080940
MP3 File: 13080940-metamorphosis-pt-3-1-the-rupture-in-the-fabric-of-reality-model-of-human-cognition.mp3
Title: Metamorphosis pt. 3.1: The Rupture in the Fabric of Reality Model of Human Cognition
Podcast/Artist: Against the Internet
Album/Series: Fight Like An Animal
Source URL: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/13080940-metamorphosis-pt-3-1-the-rupture-in-the-fabric-of-reality-model-of-human-cognition.mp3
========================
What if we had complete freedom to test new body invasive technologies on real people?
Since the dawn of science, direct technology testing on real individuals has been an ethical nightmare.
This was a problem for ancient physicists and doctors, and it's now a problem for modern scientists.
However, this doesn't seem like it's going to be a problem for Elon Musk.
About apparently having things, finding things inside their bodies like implants and bits of
technology. What if we had complete freedom to test new body invasive technologies on real people?
Substance dualism comes from. That there are two different many other ways, but just to kind of
summarize. Greetings friends, I'm Arnold Schroeder, and this is Fight Like an Animal. You can find
episode bibliographies and other texts. For instance, a draft chapter of the book I'm
working on that I just posted called Biophobia and Its Consequences detailing the long-term
impacts to social movements from the fundamental rejection of biological human nature.
Find all that at againsttheinternet.com, and if you want to support this tireless,
perhaps even slightly heroic effort materially, please check out patreon.com
slash biological singularity. Friends, I sat down to record episode 64, perhaps a little
daunted by the longer than usual bibliography and concerned about what it implied for the recording
length, and I got back up from that recording process about six hours later. And so I decided
to break this up into sub episodes. You'll notice as a consequence that there are no
transitions whatsoever as you navigate episode 64.1, 2, etc. that it simply resumes exactly
as if I had been sitting there recording in one take without, you know, five to ten minutes of
introductory, you know, digressions, observations, promises to get back to my email soon or anything
like that. Hopefully nobody misses it. Okay. If we were doing this in sensational television format,
it would start with the narrator saying, homo sapiens has existed for approximately the
last 300,000 years. But for a great deal of that time, we didn't exhibit the behaviors that we would
come to associate with modern humanity. But then around 100,000 years ago dot dot dot something
happened. It's true. There's something that happened that can't be reduced to anything like
an increase in brain size and perhaps really can't be reduced to any particular singular
categorical variable or a singular decisive threshold that got crossed or anything like that.
But something profoundly changed that came to, you know, characterize humans as we think of
ourselves today and distinguish us from our counterparts such as Neanderthals and Denisovians
that allowed us to take over the world while they went extinct. And today we are going to ask
ourselves what the nature of that change could have been. And so to briefly reiterate,
we began this series introducing these themes of freeze and fracture versus fusion and flow,
which for however much it might seem like the kind of annoyingly idiosyncratic conceptual lens
that somebody would get lost in for the sake of having, you know, an idiosyncratic conceptual
frame to get lost in. You know, we talked about how these themes really do apply
uncannily well across a wide range of systems and scales that are useful for understanding our,
you know, our current trajectory towards annihilation in evolutionary terms. And we talked
about how navigating the crisis that we find ourselves in towards better outcomes or for
that matter towards worse outcomes is pretty inevitably going to be an evolutionary process.
We talked about the fundamental convergence of the notions of revolution and evolution.
And then in, you know, this, that episode had like a pretty atemporal quality, you know,
is everything from early human evolution to the fracturing of epistemologies so characteristic
of the current era and how that is so significant to the dynamics of power that we currently
experienced. And then in the next episode, because I do want to talk about consciously
engaging in an evolutionary process as a way of navigating the situation we find ourselves in,
metamorphosis two was really focused on trying to ground the evolutionary process
experientially. So we talked about, and it also provided a sort of, you know,
another purpose of this series is to sort of inculcate in understanding and people of the
biology of developmental plasticity that I think is so essential to any realistic
revolutionary understanding that is the kind of biology that I would really like to see
political revolutionaries get a better understanding of and the kind of biology that contrasts so
sharply with the more abstract model centric forms of evolutionary psychology and whatnot
that so much egalitarian politics exists in a state of kind of uncomprehending reaction
to and rejection of. And so I tried to introduce the idea of gene expression changes as a fundamental
driver of evolution as opposed to random gene sequence mutations with all the socio-political
significance that entails, the sense that evolution can happen a whole lot faster than
is accounted for in a lot of conventional models with, you know, a profound debt, a profound
intellectual debt in the articulation of these evolutionary concepts to Mary Jane West Eberhardt
and her brilliant book, the closest thing that fight like an animal has to a bible of developmental
plasticity and evolution. You know, so on the one hand I tried to introduce that sort of
greater sense of like plasticity and rapid radical adaptive capacity that evolution has.
And then at the same time, to introduce the notion that our behaviors and our experiences shape
gene expression. So introducing choice into evolutionary processes, right, right, rather
than evolution being guided by random gene sequence mutations that just happen to confer
fortuitous traits, and then those going through a big game theory war with other random gene sequence
mutations that confer other traits, you know, until they become fixed across a population
or whatever. What we do generating the changes in gene expression that drive so much of evolution
and what we do being a function of what we decide to do. And then using that as a frame
for grounding a discussion of evolution in our actual experience to try to describe
experientially what it would have been like to be at the forefront of various evolutionary
processes, to be in the cognitive evolutionary avant-garde, right, to be experiencing cognitive
processes and undertaking endeavors of symbolic abstraction that we take for granted that, you
know, characterize humanity at large now, but which at one point of course were novel and
unprecedented and rare in populations, right, and probably the province of weirdos and freaks
and artists just like unconventional thinking and perceptions are today. And so I specifically
like tended towards, again, this was like not very temporally bounded, but you know,
I did tend to try to describe experiential processes associated with evolution
that would have been happening in the course of humanity gaining symbolic capacity. And in particular,
I focused on how embodied experience is recruited for our processes of symbolic abstraction.
This is pretty much the whole story of evolution, right, is, you know, a trait developing for one
reason or another, and then getting recruited, appropriated, co-opted, whatever for another
purpose. The technical term, I guess, is expectation, but I very rarely see it used. So I'll continue
to say that traits get recruited for other purposes than the ones for which they originally
evolved. But we were somewhat agnostic on where exactly we were in the course of the human journey
in the course of that episode. A lot of what I was saying would have been broadly applicable
to any part, you know, any stage from the transition from Australopithecus to Homo through to,
you know, the advent of cognitively modern humanity, I suppose. But now, while these episodes in this
series will continue to have these kind of broader overarching thematics, they are going to take on
a little more of a sort of like successive temporally specific quality. So in this one,
we are going to talk about the 300,000 years that encompass the adventure of Homo sapiens itself,
of anatomically modern humanity. And then in the next one, we're going to talk about
basically the sweep of prehistory, although we will continue to touch back into the course
of human evolution itself a little bit. But we are going to be the sort of like grand thematic is
going to be centered around the relationship between social structure and the specific subset
of the overall range of behavioral and perceptual potentials that we contain, that different social
structures elicit and the relationship between all that and environmental conditions, right, waiting
into the perennial dialogues around human egalitarianism and hierarchy in relation to
environmental conditions, which is certainly not something I've never talked about before
in the time that the episode in which I would discuss it in the greatest detail
would have been in the ethnogenesis series. But we're going to examine that from the vantage
point of a much bigger bibliography. I think this episode, by the way, will have the biggest
bibliography of any fight like an animal episode to date, I think, you know, with the exceptions
of the times that I read from like draft book chapters, which are the, you know, are a composite
of tons and tons of different episodes, I think. But yeah, but so we'll look at that question of
these interrelated variables of, you know, evolved behavioral potentials, social structure,
and environmental conditions across, you know, to some extent the course of human evolution,
but then certainly like prehistory and up to the thresholds of like agriculture
and the, you know, the intensification, population expansion, all that good stuff.
And then the next time will be a journey through history, right, and into the present day.
And then the sixth and final episode will be about the future, you know, the present going
forward. And I guess that is after all the definition of the future. And it will be the
episode in which I really substantiate the promise that this series is in fact about,
you know, drawing lessons from the evolutionary trajectory we've been on so far to apply to
are the future evolutionary prospects that we are faced with. And then yeah, this episode
has some of the fundamentals of the biology of developmental plasticity that I'm trying to use
this series as an opportunity to kind of like teach or convey throughout. But there's one
particularly significant one towards the end of this episode that is just right up there with,
I mean, it is some mind blowing strange shit that is well established, but also tends to be
utterly disregarded in the vast majority of evolutionary discourse, because it's so
mind blowing and strange and contradicts, it's explicitly contradicted by a lot of what people
say. And that is because it really defeats the sort of like mechanistic worldview that
so many people seem to associate with respectable scientific explanations, right? It's the single
thing that most clearly illustrates that machine metaphors don't always accurately describe life,
which isn't exactly terribly surprising considering that we all intuitively understand
that there is in fact some really fundamental difference between machines and life. So wouldn't
it be sort of surprising if you could entirely accurately characterize life in terms of machines,
but that really is what most people do most of the time. And so, you know,
somewhere along this way, in addition to accounting for 300,000 years of evolution,
the entirety of the human journey from the time we became homo sapiens up through the transition
into cognitive modernity or whatever. In addition to all that, there'll be some fundamental
bio theory that is just right up there with, you know, the weirdest thing in physics you've
ever read, quantum entanglement, whatever, some stuff that'll just really, you know,
hopefully kind of blow your mind and make you feel like what, you know,
is consciousness really an emergent property of brains? Or is it fundamental to the universe?
Did the Big Bang even really happen? And just generally, what the fuck is going on around
here, right? So let's get started. Okay, so approximately 100,000 years ago,
something happened. What was it? What it wasn't was some abrupt rupture in the fabric of existence.
What it wasn't was some decisive threshold being crossed before which humanity wandered
in uncomprehending darkness, and after which we ascended into the light of rational deliberative
thought processes and endless echelons of symbolic abstraction, and all the rest.
We're very much going to be telling a story about processes of cumulative intensification,
of traits that we share with a very wide range of other species. But accounts like that are very,
very common. It is extremely tempting for whatever reason for people to seek out some behavior
or artifact or, you know, to posit some shift in the course of humanity's evolutionary journey
and imagine that this was the moment of radical rupture, the revolutionary change that defined
us as human. And it's just not there. So symbolism is seeing a thing in terms of another thing.
So that's true in terms of logical abstraction. We use numbers to represent quantities or
whatever. We use the word hippopotamus to represent the hippopotamus and all that. But it's also true
in terms of the underlying neurophysiology and sensations and behavioral apparatus that
are used to produce symbolic abstraction, right? These things originally existed for some other
reason. And symbolic abstraction is this process of all of these extant biological capacities being
engaged in a new process, you know, things existing in terms of a new thing or another thing.
And it's helpful because humans invoke so many different levels of abstraction
in our routine thought processes and our daily lives and what I'm doing right now and everything
that they're kind of beyond enumeration. But it can be really helpful to look at how this
process kind of gets to understand the process in general. It's much easier to look at it in
other species where there's just really like one or two or three or four layers of abstraction
involved in a given behavior or whatever. And so, you know, a good enough place as any to start
is in this realm of behavior that's very widely distributed across many, many species that even
to this day, you know, starting way back in the early 20th century, scientists really couldn't
help using the word rituals to describe certain types of animal behavior. And they still can't
today. So this is I'm deliberately choosing a paper from quite a while ago, while I am because I'm just
a big fan of Conrad Lorenz. But here's what Conrad Lorenz had to say about it in 1966. He says,
the first and probably most important characteristic of ritualization has already been mentioned.
A phylogenetically adapted motor pattern, which originally served the species in dealing with
some environmental necessities, acquires a new function, that of communication. And he gives
an example. The primary function may persist as in many fishes, birds and mammals, in which
locomotion has been ritualized so as to communicate to the fellow members of the species and animals
moving away. All these movements release the response to follow in others of the same species
in conspecific animals is how he puts it. And then a little later, the second characteristic
of ritualized motor patterns is a change of form, which the unritualized prototype underwent in
the service of its new communicative function, in which quite obviously was brought about by
the selection pressure exerted by the survival value of communication. All those elements
which even in the unritualized primary movement produce visual or auditory stimulation are
strongly exaggerated, while those serving the original mechanical function are greatly reduced
or disappear altogether. Okay, so there we have like one level of symbolic abstraction, right?
So, you know, and one and correspondingly one level of recruitment of extent, you know,
expectation is the formal term, but I never really see it used that often in the literature,
but, you know, one level of recruitment of an extent, you know, behavioral module, you know,
set of neurophysiological means of behavior production, whatever you want to call it,
being recruited into the service of some new function, right? So, you know, a behavior, say,
for instance, a set of behaviors that would be characteristic of an animal going somewhere,
get ritualized. And so the elements that produce any kind of like visual or auditory
stimulation are greatly exaggerated. And the elements that just actually involved like movement or,
you know, like a purely mechanical function get really diminished and it constitutes a signal
to other or a symbol, right, to other animals that says time to go. And so, yeah, so that's one
level. And I guess, you know, I mean, perhaps we should even go a little further, because it
does kind of help us think about symbolism in a pretty interesting way, and actually say that
anything the animal is perceiving in its nervous system already involves a bunch of, I mean, that's
symbolic abstraction of itself, right? And so that already involves these levels of translation
from the raw information of the environment from the raw stimulus, let's say, into something that's
perceived. Typically, the word transduction is used when talking about this signal
transduction, right? So there's sound waves. And then the sound waves vibrate,
you know, your ear drawn like a tiny little bone in inside your ear, right? So that's the first level
of signal transduction, the translation between sound wave and vibration of the little bone in your
ear. And then that produces nervous impulses. So that's like the next level of signal transduction.
And I like that term to talk about the processes of symbolic abstraction as they kind of go through
different brain regions, and different invoke different sort of processes of, you know, well,
just yeah, different processing capabilities that evolve for different reasons, right? This is,
as I was talking about in the last episode, the experience, the corporeal experience of
falling through a graph, when you're learning math or whatever, like seeing a first derivative
plummet and having a physical sensation of falling or, you know, in the course of evolution,
trying to rotate a tool in your mind. And it's like a neuro physiological process that would be
involved in rotating something with your hand might be involved, as would be a subjective
experience of being rotated yourself, whatever. So you can kind of think of that as like this
information being transduced through these different, you know, different elements of our
overall, you know, behavioral and perceptual apparatus or whatever you want to call it. I really try
not to use too many machine metaphors, but whatever. And yeah, yeah, so, you know, so the very process
of perception involves a bunch of transformations of this sort or signal transductions. But then
once once we're already once we've already had the the extraordinary, the exquisitely complex
process of symbolic construction, such that animals are moving around in their environment
and perceiving things and one another. We see this this first level of symbolic abstraction
where a behavior that evolved for whatever reason is ritualized into a behavior that
communicates something to other individuals. But then we can see that process gain another
level of abstraction in a number of cases. In some cases, these involve coordinated behaviors
of many individuals, all doing something all engaging in some ritualized behavior together,
which then creates, you know, another level of symbolic reference by kind of like
connoting a cumulative like an emergent group identity that's greater than the sum of its
parts or distinct from it in some meaningful sense. So you see this with like the social
soaring of ravens. I talked in one I talked in one of those group mind episodes about the sort of
innate drive that so many species seem to have to kind of just engage in coordinated cohesive
behavior for its own sake. You know, with I talked about the behavior of crows who sometimes
aggregate in huge numbers and just engage in this, you know, like really conspicuous vocalization
and movement behavior that doesn't seem to have too much of a functional purpose other than to say
we're crows, right, you know, and compared it to experiences like transcendental religious,
you know, like ecstatic experiences, well, concerts, riots and cults is like the name of
the episode right to things like that. You see this certainly with like chimpanzees and other
primates, you'll see that sometimes there's just sort of a thing that happens when there's a lot
of them together. There's a bunch of vocalization and locomotion and, you know, various kind of
displays and stuff, but they're not really directed at anybody in particular. And it's just
kind of you get this distinct sense that there's just sort of this cumulative sense of identity
being expressed or this kind of transcendental experience that is being had or something,
right. And then it's actually this gets in there's like the spooky realm of this, which is that
studies on the synchronization of behavior when people are engaged in coordinated behavior,
I'm talking about humans now, but I have to assume this is true of other species.
It's not just that if you look, if you look at their brains in an MRI machine or whatever,
that the regions that are functionally responsible for the actual coordinated behavior are showing
similarities. That's trivially obvious. But there's also like, you know, there's activity
that doesn't have anything to do with what's happening, you know, just like different kind
of like wave patterns and stuff in the brain that like sync up between people who are all doing
engaging in some coordinated activity, all like drumming or engaging in synchronized movement of
some kind. So that's that's that good, that's that good spooky stuff that shows up every once in a while.
I really think anybody knows exactly what that's about. But then a particularly interesting case
of this kind of like third level of symbolic abstraction and other species, I wanted to
mention because it doesn't involve because it seems to be a solitary behavior. And it
it seems to have some pretty like strong affinities for realms of experience that some people, I think
would assume are kind of uniquely human, like, little, little on the mysterious and transcendence
side. And this is the so called accumulative rock throwing behavior of chimpanzees. But it's
where basically like chimps in some populations, this is not chimp populations show a great deal
of behavioral diversity. And in some populations, chimpanzees in their aggressive displays
incorporate rocks, they throw rocks around, they bang rocks on stuff, whatever. But then
in a subset of those populations, there's something that has happened that seems very
distinct. So right, those are the two levels, right? You know, the behavior, the behaviors of
aggression have been ritualized into the aggressive displays and to the communicative
behaviors. But then in some populations that use rocks in their displays, it's like chimpanzees
will go to these certain trees and do a modified form of their aggressive display.
But they won't really be actually aggressively displaying at anybody and it'll involve rocks
and they will bang rocks against trees or throw the rocks. But then very interestingly,
in some cases, they'll just pile rocks up in the hollows of tree trunks and return to the
same trees over and over again to do this and like drum on the trees and then add another
rock or whatever. Such that there's some trees that have these big piles of stones inside them that
very much has, you know, the quality of a shrine or something. As the authors of this paper say,
this is from a paper called chimpanzee accumulative stone throwing published in 2016.
They say chimpanzee accumulative stone throwing could have emerged from a motivation
other than the enhancement of ritualized male displays. In this case, one would not necessarily
expect a major functional advantage of sound propagation compared to hand and feet drumming
on the tree trunks. If this were true, these rock accumulation sites may need to be considered
in a more symbolic context. And a little later, in fact, marking territorial boundaries and
pathways with cairns, those are piles of rocks, has been an important practice of many historical
human societies. For example, stone accumulation shrines at sacred trees are well described for
indigenous West African peoples. Superficially, these cairns appear very similar to what has
been described here for chimpanzee accumulative stone throwing sites. Thus, it would be
interesting to explore whether there are any parallels between chimpanzee accumulative
stone throwing and human cairn building, especially in regions of West Africa where the local environment
is similar. Although there is no overarching agreed upon definition of ritual, similarities
between ritualized animal behavior and the repeated stereotyped behaviors commonly observed
during human rituals have already been proposed by anthropologists and ethologists as having
a common origin as well as sharing similar neurological pathways. I just thought that
that was a pretty striking example. Something that's awfully uncannily specific to something
that humans do have this interesting compulsion to do all this all over the place. You see people
have this need to pile up stones in a lot of places and a lot of contexts and certainly
percussive behavior. You see this real set of affinities to things that
humans do. It's not like we come to the decisions to do those things through
some process of real explicit rational deliberation or something. It's clearly
it's just part of us. That framework allows us to, because in the case of human abstraction,
what we're actually talking about is just so many more layers of exactly those kind of processes
being involved in our thought processes, in our capacities for symbolic abstraction. Just
increasingly long chains of conversion of signal transduction, of conversion of one
concept or image or behavior into another via the recruitment of various brain regions or behavioral
modules or perceptual capacities or whatever you want to think about it, whatever the
case may be. But these increasingly long and increasingly well abstract, increasingly
removed from a concrete relationship, types of symbolic transformation characterizes our cognition
and it gets impossible to keep track of. But it's helpful that there are these sort of evolutionary
precursors that what we're doing really is just a matter of degree. So seeing cases where
there's just a few of these processes of signal transduction or translation or whatever you want
to call it, both in terms of a thing representing another thing and then in terms of a behavioral
apparatus communicating with another behavioral apparatus, it helps us understand what's happening
in the human case. So of course, a good place to make this concrete a thing we could look at
would be language. And this is not how people tend to think of it, right? People tend to so often
in these accounts, talk about language as this sort of like a abrupt schism in the fabric of
reality, right? This complete departure from anything that preceded it. And therefore to
really not talk about the bridging phenotypes, to really not look at the communicative behaviors of
our close relatives, and to imagine that, you know, we had something fairly similar going on
at the point we diverged from our common ancestor with them and ask, okay, so what was like how
were those specific extent behaviors that we can see in other species? How did those
progressively change? How did those evolve into what we're doing now? And so I'm going to give an
example. I sort of don't like doing this in a sense because I really like a lot of the work
that these folks put out. And, you know, it's, you know, we're both working broadly speaking,
you know, I mean, I would say like if you had to, if you had to isolate me into an academic
department of the revolution, I am definitely the biology department and not the anthropology
department. But obviously, like we're both kind of working in this realm of egalitarianism as an
evolutionary inheritance of the human species. But you know, I'm going to read, it's also just
so that it has to be forgiven for having a bunch of errors in that respect, because we just
didn't know as much as we know now. But for this paper, the human symbolic revolution, a Darwinian
account by a few of the folks associated with the radical anthropology group, Chris Knight,
Camilla Power, and Ian Watts. This is from 1995. So again, you know, we didn't know that Neanderthals
had language. We didn't know that small brain hominids etched patterns into walls and buried
their dead. But this is a good case. This is like very broadly characteristic of how this stuff gets
talked about a lot, still to this day, I guess it's getting better. But it's one of those things,
like it reflects a psychological tendency, you know, as so much scientific convention does,
it represents, I think, really a sense of disconnection from other kinds of intelligences
and other other kinds of intelligence and, you know, just the other beings that we share this world
with. But yeah, so you know, this is an example of talking about language, like it's this just
sort of totally profound qualitative shift, like this entry into this whole symbolic world
that has no like point of connection or continuity with anything happening
among the other beings that we live on this planet with. So they say in this paper, when we
speak, we use coded terms to successively trigger imaginative acts of identification
of pre-existent constructs, each distributed throughout the speech community, the more
morally authoritative ones, God, supernatural potency, et cetera, being central to the whole
system, vocal emphasis my own, right? Only humans can gossip about unicorns and hence
about anything imaginable. For a signaler to refer or point to something, whether just
earlier using a code, the receiver must be able to see what is meant. The parties must share
experience of the same world. If the references to something imaginary, then all involved must
inhabit the same imaginary world. Vervits and other primates live in the real world.
Their calls and gestures concern ongoing social environmental events. Primates know of no gods
and seemingly need none. There's therefore nothing for them to vocalize about except
ongoing real events and experiences, for which purpose a gesture call system suffices.
Since primates lack a constructed world of commonly acknowledged, morally authoritative
intangibles referenced to them, syntactical or otherwise is simply unthinkable. Neither
the primate nor the adult homo brain is designed to confuse fantasy with reality. In evolutionary
terms, this is a novel function. In this light, it seems misguided to imagine that even highly
intelligent, archaic humans who stumbled upon the supposedly self-evident advantages and quotes
of symbolic language would necessarily have appreciated those advantages. Whether they're
undoubted, whatever their undoubted symbolic capacities, unless they already had powerful
reasons for sharing pure fantasies, the point of making the switch to true language would have
escaped them. Symbolic speech would have been redundant for the same reason that teaching
chimps how to say God is a waste of time. Okay, so again, right, I'm reading this to
characterize a kind of thinking common in evolutionary theory that doesn't look for
the bridging phenotypes between primate gestural and vocal communication and what we do now and
doesn't do this thing that I've been talking about, about thinking about successive layers of
abstraction, right, you know, about symbols, you know, things being conceived of in terms of
other things and different, you know, behavioral capacities being recruited into this process
of ever more abstract construction. And so the way that I think about language, I think there's an
awful lot to talk about that isn't something that's happening right then and there, that isn't
something you can point at and be like, hey, there's a predator over there that we should
be scared of, but that also isn't God. To me, there's quite a bit of distance, quite a bit of
territory in between those two things, right? And so, you know, you can imagine you can imagine
somebody saying something like at some point, I would imagine because we should like Neanderthals
have language, this is pretty well established at this point, they have the right mutations in
like Fox2P and their DNA sequence, their endocasts show the shape because the Broca's area is
pretty exterior, they had the Broca's area in their brains, and you know, like we mated with them.
It's just like, and when we look at the whole range of their behaviors and how much, even though
we diverged from them, like somewhere between, it's a big range, but somewhere between like
eight and 400,000 years ago, how they were very much on a parallel track until this process
happened about 100,000 years ago that we're trying to figure out, even though we weren't
really interacting with them, they were developing in a very similar way. It's just totally unthinkable
that they didn't have language. But you know, so like, let's move because I think that we started
cooperatively breeding and exhibiting some of the social structure, some of the more
egalitarian social structure, which also would have involved this like increase in our
capacities for social comprehension. Around, I think that's kind of what defines the transition
into homo erectus, along with the use of the persistent use of fire that militates for the
same division of labor that also allows for cooperative breeding or aloe parenting or
whatever you want to call it, use sociality. Biology is a wilderness of overlapping
terms that you know, whatever. But, or so is every damn science, but you know, I would imagine
that language at some point in say the time of homo erectus or before, right? You know,
like let's say, maybe this was characteristic of homo habilis or whatever. Maybe Australopithecus
did some form of what I'm about to say, but it's like a conversation may have been something like
son, you, me, him, walk, river, horse, drink, kill, right? You know, and it's like,
translate that out to like, when the sun rises, you and me and him should walk to the river,
where the horses drink to kill one. But in terms of how you actually said this at, you know,
a previous stage of human symbolic and linguistic capacity, you know, everything we know from other
primate communications, everything we know from, you know, like at one time had a conversation,
I guess you could call it, with some people who had just came over the border, spoke very little
English that, you know, amounted to us saying something like, Hey, tomorrow, let's hop a train
to Yakima, Washington, so that we can pick apples for money. But tonight, let's get drunk.
You know, like that this would have involved saying this thing about going to the river and
killing the horses would have involved a combination of like actually symbolic vocalizations,
right? You know, like the employment of what is presumably a very small, like kind of true
vocabulary of linguistic terms. And it would have involved pantomime, and it would have
involved vocal imitation, right? You know, like making the noises of an animal or whatever.
And generally would have felt anytime that this comes up, right? Like, when I read McGill
Christ trying to describe this and using the term Musa language, like to describe early stages of
human linguistic evolution as being really musical and involving a lot of physical movement or
whatever, you know, it would have been kind of like annoying performance art or whatever. I just
have spent too much of my life exposed to too much of that not to make that comparison. But,
you know, so it's like, it's like sun is like you're pointing off to the horizon and like
gesturing that, you know, like the sun is rising. And for you and me and him, it's like you've got
a point at the person you're communicating with and to somebody else and to yourself.
And for walk, you can pantomime. And then for river, you've got a pantomime too. Maybe you
make some noise like like a flowing river. And then you got to act like a horse, you know,
make some horse noises and act like you're drinking from the from the river. Or maybe
you like take a drink from, you know, some water you got sitting around and then you got to like
make your like spear gesture or whatever, right? But, you know, and so it's like that's,
that's the that's the stage kind of right after the chimpanzee, the chimpanzee level of
symbolic communicative linguistic capacity, you know, and then as we progress through the
course of human evolution, as the Broca's area gets more developed and changes towards a more vocal
symbolic function from, you know, one involved in gesture and facial expression, this, you know,
can turn into, you know, when when the mighty sun rises tomorrow, you and me and him, the great
horse killers should walk to the river early in the morning before the horses go for their morning
drink and hide in the bush on the ridge overlooking the river at the one spot, right? You know, and
it's like we can see these increasing levels of elaboration that would be possible to talk about.
But the fact that the horse isn't right there that you can't just point at the horse,
you know, it's like it like requires some kind of some symbolism to communicate. And like I said,
like, you know, anytime that you're with somebody who doesn't share language with you,
you know, if you're just like working in a kitchen with somebody or on a construction site,
who doesn't speak the same language as you, you very quickly find out that there's some
things that aren't like, behold, the Rainbow Bridge Bifrost that connects this world mid-guard
of the mortals to Asgard, the land of the gods or whatever, that you would like to be able to
communicate about that you really can't, you know, and it's like the more temporally or spatially
remote they are, and they're just like the more complicated they are, you know, like obviously,
like there's just stuff that you can't communicate without being able to say
stuff like, you know, like we should kill the guy who's pushing us around or whatever,
there's just no way. And so that process of increasing linguistic complexity probably brought
a lot of sort of accelerated a lot of symbolic reasoning, because it gave us something,
because it gave us a way to formalize it, it gave us a way to really institutionalize
our symbolic thought, just like mathematics at a later stage in humanity has given us another
set of terms, which in many cases are far more accurate. But, you know, it's not symbolic,
people get really confused about this. And for as much as I love language, I'm honestly so surprised
so often by how much people think language really essentially is symbolic thought that
there's like essentially no distance between those two things. And it's that's not right,
you know, what we're doing when we symbolically reason is just an intensification of something
that's happening in a lot of species. There's a few other things that are worth mentioning because
they're fun here about, you know, the pushing back of symbolic thresholds to increasingly distant,
common ancestors of humanity with other hominins, as we find, you know, just as archaeology
produces more and more results. So, you know, like in the 90s, when human symbolic revolution was
written, I remember when they discovered the incised pieces of red ochre in the caves in South
Africa. And it was such a big deal. And it was it was so like such a nexus of this kind of speculation
about, you know, this is when humanity exited the uncomprehending darkness and entered the light of
rational symbolic, you know, abstract, deliberative thought, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. And
like, I remember just being like really kind of saddened by it in a way, because I don't know.
Again, I think that that I think, you know, it really starts with like Descartes and all that
stuff. But it's like this this need to perceive abstraction as just somehow, like, totally
distinct from to just not involve anything that has any kind of like grounding and the
rest of reality that just comes from a true sense of disconnection with the world.
But you know, so it's like we've for quite a while now, Neanderthals have been finding,
you know, their place among among symbol makers in in archaeology. So it's like,
we now have, you know, we have incisions that they've made into pieces of red ochre,
strong, you know, indicating one of two pretty equally interesting possibilities either that
developed in parallel, or probably more likely that that was just something that a common ancestor
was doing. But you know, Neanderthals were on a very broadly similar evolutionary trajectory
as humans, like I said, until just about 100,000 years ago. But just recently, just if I had
if I had gotten this podcast out when I initially intended to this, this wouldn't
have been published. But here's from a paper that came out like five days ago.
Scholars have long argued that there is a qualitative difference between the abilities
of Homo sapiens versus other Pleistocene hominins, and that this difference has to
do with overall brain size and neurobiological complexity, complex behavior and the construction
and use of meaning laden material, for instance, burial, fire as light engravings,
ornamentation, ochre use, etc. have all been suggested to be signals of modern human cognitive
capacity tied to a brain well above 1000 cubic centimeters. The recent finds from the
Dinnelletti chamber rising star cave South Africa indicate that large brain only model
for complex hominin behavior no longer holds. And that's because the they found the cave in
question contains not only the burials in in graves that were dug out, but also all of this
really interesting symbolic etching in the cave walls. That's actually much more complex than
anything we have for humans hundreds of thousands of years later made by Homo Naledi, who are
these little hominins that these these burials and these engravings are from somewhere between
250 and 350,000 years ago, right, before any specimens we have for anything were comfortable
calling even archaic Homo sapiens say nothing about modern and they didn't undergo
encephalization at all. They just they had they had brain cases that are about 600 cubic centimeters,
which is just I think right there with australopithecus. So yeah, it's it's they they were capable of
these behaviors that for such a long time were regarded as these, you know, these decisive
thresholds that we cross. And we're finding a lot of interesting things in caves, you know,
we also recently found these stalagmite circles in caves that Neanderthals built that are really
just spooky otherworldly looking ritual sites, you know, these like big circles made out of
stalagmites with that had fires burnt on them and that had pigments applied to them.
Who knows what it meant or whatever. But when you look at pictures, both of both these of the Homo
Naledi finds and the Neanderthal stalagmite circles, I mean, they both they both really hit home,
you know, they make you feel away. They have a cool effect. So yeah, so this this has gone
on and on and on forever. Again, I think reflecting this kind of underlying psychological tendency,
where just so many traits, so many aspects of the archaeological record have been entertained as
potentially the sort of the decisive indication of some abrupt rupture from everything that came
before in the cognitive abilities and subjective experience of Homo sapiens. There's a list
from this great paper called the revolution that still isn't the origins of behavioral complexity
in Homo sapiens that was published this year in 2023. And the reason it's called the revolution
that still isn't is they're riffing on a paper that was published in I think 2000, yeah 2000,
that was kind of, you know, like arguing against that type of thinking that there's some definitive
trait with which we should associate cognitive modernity. And that rather than looking for this
like stark dividing line between human and not human, we should see ourselves as emerging gradually
in recruiting a whole bunch of processes and capacities that we share in common with a bunch
of species along this particular trajectory of the intensification of like some of those
processes and capacities. And so it's not that and it's not that these traits are wrong,
it's not that they didn't happen, it's not that they aren't useful in understanding the human story,
it's just it's not that they were talked about, it's how they were talked about,
whereby their mere presence was invoked as like in a single categorical fashion,
because again complexity is complex, we should be looking for a big range of behaviors
and for a cumulative intensity of the expression of a given trait. And not just it's like mere
presence or absence, you know, but so it's like all these evolutionary inferences were made from
things like long distance transport, you know, for instance of raw materials and shells,
the inference being social networks exchange, and it's like in the case of I'm not going
to do it for each one of these, but trust me, in the case of each one of these traits,
I can point to how this is something that exists in any number of other species in some fashion
or another, right, and how it's not like, you know, so again, it's like we have to understand
the process and the degree and the relationship between a whole host of other things that are
happening, because we have to understand there's like two ways to build a bird nest, right,
and one is to evolve specifically to build a bird nest, and one is to use trigonometry to,
you know, conceive of the shape and then to like have a bunch of abstract thought
about the materials you might use, right, and so we can't look like even something like,
you know, engraving a piece of red ochre, like why is that, is that any more complex than
building a beaver dam or the courtship display of a sage grouse or whatever, right,
those are two examples I used last episode, no, it's just absolutely not, and so we, you know,
we have to know how, like how the behavior happens, does the behavior happen because,
and I would say that this is the case for Homo sapiens, because we have specific and
obviously for Homo naledi, you know, have we evolved specific capacities for,
you know, say like object, like manual object manipulation, right, have we evolved specific
capacities for tool use, right, think about that for a second, like it's certainly possible
that tool use could be something that happens evolutionarily in a really specific way,
without having any implications for abstract thought at all, right, or, you know,
for that matter, I mean like when you actually think about this, what you see is that it's
a combination of both, that there are a bunch of, because you can even have behaviors that involve
symbolic abstraction on some level, but that also have like a lot of evolutionary specificity,
that's why we learn language without thinking about it, without having to actually learn the
rules, you know, nobody telling us, oh, if you want to make a question, you know, move the
verb to the beginning, instead of saying it is raining, say is it raining, you know,
we don't have to do that, we, and so it's like, you really need this like complex way to think
about that tense interrelation between things that we kind of get for free through evolution,
even if they do have something to do with symbolism or abstraction, and then like actual
processes of like symbolic or abstract reflection that are more like conscious, right,
you know, but then a bunch of this other stuff that's sort of distinctly human,
but doesn't necessarily involve symbols or abstraction, right, like tool use isn't any of that,
like beavers build dams, that's not like you could have to spear without having to think about
it in an abstract way, you could just evolve to do it, you could incise a piece of ochre the
same way, so this whole list has something like that, where it's like you can think about
how other animals do very similar things, it's in the categorical presence or absence of the
behavior is totally insufficient to indicate anything like what we might call cognitive
complexity or anything, so we also have standardization of regionally distinctive artifacts and tool
forms, inference, social networks, signaling of emblematic style, but you know, it's like
chimpanzees have distinct cultures, notching, incision, patterns, art, well I literally
just talked about that, the inferences, intentional designs, abstract thinking, intro group, within
group codification, and symbols with language, but you know, maybe not, collection of shells,
some intentionally perforated, but like lots of animals collect pretty things for a variety of
reasons, you know, inferences, personal ornamentation, aesthetics, symbolism, collections of sets,
it's fascinating to read about like self-adornment in chimpanzees, you know, like when chimps,
cases recorded where like chimps will wear the skin of one of their prey animals for a long time,
Deval, Franz Deval talks very compellingly about the sort of like self-possession
he sees in captive chimpanzees who will ornament themselves in various ways and then kind of
like look in the mirror and you know, like modify, like put a leaf on their head and then adjust it
a little bit and have this kind of like, yeah I look good without leaf, you know, so yeah I
don't know, let me just read through this list real quick, intentional burial, you see tons of
animals, elephants are famous for it, but it happens in more than elephants, hippos and whatnot,
you know, you see tons of animals interact with their dead in a way that indicates a very clear
continuity between our experience of grieving and respecting our dead and the, you know, the
processes other species engage in, artifact diversity, inform material and method, inferences
like tasks, specialization, structured living spaces, inferences like group cohesion, planning
depth, social order, but again like whatever, birds, nests, beaver lodges, diet, breadth,
inferences, adaptability, flexibility, plasticity of behavior, lots of animals have a very
general, like a general diet and can, you know, and then the next one is expanded ecological
niche and likewise this is supposed to infer and, you know, provide the inference of innovation,
planning and experimentation, but like tons of animals are habitat generalists and can adapt to,
you know, I mean we have this in common with like ravens and bears, yeah so okay so that's,
you know, just just an indication of how this kind of thinking, this need for like a categorical
presence or absence of a trait indicating some kind of like wholesale transformation
is just like really omnipresent and I think the reason that I'm harping on it so much
is that I see the same need in evolution, you know, I see the same psychological tendency
at work in evolutionary analysis as I do in revolutionary analysis where people, you know,
really just want to reduce social processes and processes of social transformation
to a smaller set of like just discrete, tidy variables than is actually the case, right,
that's my perennial frustration with so many social theories is not that they're wrong so much
is that they just feel incomplete and sometimes I can feel people's, you know, in conversation
and probably in this podcast, I can feel people's frustration when I start talking about a set of
conditions and I just keep adding variables and adding variables and adding variables and being
like well this other aspect of this that's important is, you know, this and then there's
also this thing to consider and it's like people don't like it all the time but I'm just like
but I'm engaging the world on the terms in which the world exists, right, the world just
really is exactly as complex as it is and deciding to talk about it in terms that are less complex
than it is because that's like more convenient or fun or exciting or whatever just it's just
going to it leads to exactly the fucking chaos that we're experiencing right now, you know,
it leads to precisely this situation we find ourselves in where people are like ardently
reaffirming their political convictions because they don't know what else to do but you can
kind of tell nobody really believes the stories they're telling like it seems like very few people
believe that they actually are in possession of a theory that will allow them to like fundamentally
transform the whole world in some meaningful way that will, you know, like actually prevent our
collective annihilation. Wait, I should stop. I should stop. I'm going way beyond the the necessary
quantity of this particular critique but I just have to mention this last one because I've always
been astonished by it which is that another thing that gets invoked as the casual basis of
human cognitive uniqueness is that we endured the crazy like rapidly shifting climate and therefore
ecology of, you know, Africa over the course of the last couple million years before the
gentle Holocene and you know what animals we share that story with every other species that
survived Africa over the course of the last couple of million years. Okay, okay, I'm done. I swear
we're moving on. We're moving on. So what would it look like if we divested ourselves of
this need to perceive decisive thresholds, you know, divested ourselves of the need to see
utter discontinuity between ourselves and the rest of life on earth and therefore the need to see
decisive thresholds of the, you know, the transformation from something other than
human to humanity. It would look a lot like this paper that I've already that this
trade list I read from is found in the revolution that still isn't the origins of behavioral
complexity and homo sapiens published this year in the Journal of Human Evolution.
And so what they describe is a scenario in which rather than some trait emerging in the
archaeological record or being inferred about behavior beyond which humanity just explodes
into the modern form that we're familiar with, we see a whole myriad, you know, traits, a whole
complex tableau of traits sort of individually emerge and fade in different regions at different
times there that are all kind of uniquely associated with homo sapiens and with the
middle stone age, right, the technological era that lasts from the time of the advent of
homo sapiens 300,000 years ago to about like 50,000, 40,000, 30,000 years ago or so.
You know, traits that are distinctly associated with our species and with that technological
complex come and go and and don't really seem to be implicated in any kind of like
unidirectional trajectory towards anything in particular until, you know, 100,000 years ago
when dot dot dot something happened. But as a consequence of that, we also see what very
much look like a number of collapses, which of course is familiar to us, right, this is this
reality that within a certain degree range of temporal proximity, we have no trouble imagining
that humans with fairly similar cognitive abilities would variably manifest those cognitive
abilities that sometimes we would live in steel and grass towers and sometimes we would live in
grass huts and sometimes we would, you know, right, but it's like we don't imagine that after
Rome exited Britain and Britain went through, you know, a really significant sort of apocalyptic
phase of collapse. We don't imagine that people had fundamentally different baseline
cognitive abilities. But when we get far enough into the past, this assumption really creeps
in implicitly or explicitly with a lot of what we a lot of how we end up talking about things.
But yeah, it's it's not true. There was definitely a lot of just history, let's say,
throughout the Middle Stone Age. So quoting from this paper, the record exhibits a predominantly
asynchronous presence and duration of many innovations across different regions of Africa.
The emerging pattern of behavioral complexity from the Middle Stone Age conforms to an
intricate mosaic characterized by spatially discreet temporally variable and historically
contingent trajectories. This archaeological record bears no direct relation to a simplistic shift
in the human brain, but rather reflects similar cognitive capacities that are variably manifest.
So this is, you know, this is interesting and important because we are going to be talking
about some cognitive changes. But they're not, you know, it does we're not talking about
real growth in overall brain size. And we're not talking about anything, you know,
totally, totally qualitatively distinct. We're talking about this intensification which has
every has a great deal of significance for how we can conceptualize an evolutionary process
in the future of the human species. Elsewhere in this paper, just to really drive this point home,
because I think it's so interesting, considering this mounting material evidence from Africa,
the period 300 to 30,000 years ago can best be characterized by multiple temporally variable
and nonlinear trajectories in different regions. Elements of this model fit with recent
theoretical developments which reject revolution narratives, but also scenarios of strictly gradual
and linear trajectories of cultural evolution for early Homo sapiens. Such concepts favor
non directional patterns of cultural change with a focus on historical contingency,
cognitive capacities, behavioral flexibility, environmental context, and path dependence.
And there really is just absolutely no pattern that the authors divide Africa up into five, you
know, broad geographical regions. Because analysis that is that just uses Africa as a unit of
geographic analysis for the development of culture, the evolution of species is a little
flawed to begin with. That's just a little too broad. But we lack West Africa just has
like a paucity of archaeological records compared to the rest of the continent. But
yeah, there is just no pattern here. Let's take ochre use, for instance, which at one point was,
you know, we only really had fines from 100,000 years ago or so, and, you know, and on. So
after this fundamental transition that we're trying to understand the nature of,
and, you know, it was a heavy contender for some kind of definitive transformation.
But ochre use actually started, I mean, well, the archaeological record in any case,
it starts at least 300,000 years ago. But because of our shared use of ochre with
Neanderthals, I think it's perfectly reasonable to speculate that it just wasn't very widespread,
but that it was indeed something that was happening in our common ancestor with Neanderthals.
If not, that's also equally interesting that we converged on this practice. Right. But,
you know, then where it's found, it's where it's found with the greatest antiquity is in
East Africa and from 300 to 200,000 years ago, and then it just goes away until 60,000 years ago.
Contrast that with North Africa, where it starts 200,000 years ago, goes away until about 125,000
years ago and then continues until 60,000 years ago, after which it's completely absent. Right.
You just get these utterly patchy, right, the like distribution of things like
long distance transport, whatever kind of inferences you want to make from that about,
you know, social networks. I mean, one or two inferences to make either people are traveling
long distances, or they're exchanging material over long distance social networks, which,
of course, you know, has a ton of implications for like the degree of intergroup contact,
which has further implications for, you know, the degree of reactive aggression, you know,
social tolerance, which has implications for internal social structure, you know,
the temperaments that are present in a population, whatever, that's like, let's take
halting the practice of attaching, you know, the making composite tools for hunting and stuff
like that. You know, once again, this shows up at completely different times in different places.
You don't see it until 70,000 years ago, or so 80,000, I guess, in South Africa, whereas it's
200,000 years old in East Africa, but then it goes away about 80,000 years ago, only to
reappear 50,000 years ago, et cetera, et cetera. Some of the other traits, I'll just name them
without describing their exceptionally variable temporal patterning, you know, the use of backed
tools by facial points, bone tools, the presence of engraving, you know, that indicator of abstract
symbolic thought in some forms of archaeological theory, bead shells, other types of bead ornaments,
the use of like coastal and aquatic resources, you know, fishing, shell fishing, stuff like that.
So yeah, what we see is just to toss one more quote into the mix from this paper,
just to really drive this point home, when looking at different regions of Africa on a
continental scale, the Middle Stone Age record appears to be peppered with the appearance,
disappearance and reinvention of key technological and social innovations alongside the extraordinary
long persistence of the mundane and the unchanging. So like they said, this doesn't,
this certainly doesn't fit with the revolution narrative, with the, you know, this was the
decisive threshold we crossed scenarios, but this is also not a strictly gradualist accumulation
of traits. So this is more complex than that. Again, it's like humans in more recent prehistory
or in history would appear to be where, you know, there's some degree of, or a very significant
degree rather, a variation in cultural complexity in the presence or absence of a given cultural
trait that doesn't actually have anything to do with an underlying baseline cognitive ability.
And so disentangling the changes that we see that are based on changes in, you know, brain
structure or underlying behavioral and perceptual potentials from history, right, from just path
dependent, you know, utterly contingent social ecological historical trajectories is a,
it's a lot of work. There's no simple way to do it, which is, you know, again, complexity is complex.
We, that's what we would expect. We wouldn't expect the emergence of behavioral and cognitive
complexity to be in complexity, to be reducible to just the presence or absence of a single
categorical variable. And we should think of the presence or absence of underlying cognitive,
you know, abilities, perceptual and behavioral potentials at any given time to be very much
the same way. We have to assume that there's a nonlinear trajectory and a very patchy,
you know, a flickering on and off of different capacities and perceptions
at different times. I mean, we can ask ourselves to embed this notion in a concrete example. Let's
ask, who spoke the very first sentence of what, you know, a bunch of cognitive linguists would
converge on a consensus of being like the first instance of true language, right, whatever
structural criteria they want to apply to be like, oh, what, you know, what whales and elephants do
isn't language, but what humans do is because you have to cross whatever this, this particular
threshold of complexity is, you know, that has, you know, work at the quantitative becomes
qualitative or whatever, right, like whatever that is, who did it first? Who is the literally
the first person to do that? And I think we have to assume that whoever it was, they were very
unusual, and they did it a very long time before such practices became totally widespread,
you know, certainly in our entire species, but even in a local population that they were
a part of, right, and I talked about this last episode, where, you know, certainly we see tendencies
towards, you know, let's say like being people who are on the margins of the range of sort of
normal perception that characterizes a society are always, you know, it's like they have a
level of social marginality that corresponds to their perceptual deviance or difference, right, and we
see this all throughout, you know, the ethnographic record with, you know, the classic scenarios,
this well-studied reality that, you know, figures like shamans and whatever are regarded with a
mixture of respects and maybe even reverence, but also hostility and profound mistrust,
they're treated like weirdos, right, you know, where their insights are considered valuable,
but they're also not quite, you know, who can trust somebody entirely who speaks to the dead and
wanders around wearing clothing of the wrong gender and, you know, just like engages in a
bunch of secretive, you know, unconventional behavior, whatever, whatever, and so
have to imagine that people who engaged in some of the first acts of, you know,
artistic, you know, artistic behavior of some kind were probably treated just like weirdo
artists in later phases of history, people who engaged in language for the first time
were probably regarded with a lot of contempt and, you know, suspicion and hostility by people
with more conventional behavioral attachments and just as the world today has its da Vinci's and
its Einstein's and, you know, and this can't just be reduced to like variation in some sort of
like overarching raw cognitive capacities, but because, you know, various behavioral and
perceptual capacities are somewhat modular, there's inter-correlations, but, you know,
they're somewhat modular, you know, we just have to imagine that certain traits that we
associate with cognitive modernity, whether it's like the ability to visualize a tool and,
you know, like higher level conceptual abilities for thinking about things that are temporally
or spatially remote and, you know, like making plans and engaging in mental worlds that are
further and further removed from any kind of direct stimulus, you know, just like that's
pretty decent definition of madness now and social deviance and being a weirdo now,
I'm sure it was back then, and I'm sure that people achieved various what we think of as
thresholds in behavioral and cognitive modernity that then kind of flickered out or maybe in some
cases they instantiated traditions that lasted a while, right, until, say, a society that didn't
know how to make fire but had fire, you know, until their fires finally went out or the rains
stopped falling or the migratory root of the animals they hunted changed and they had a kind
of a local collapse, you know, both these things would be true both that you would lack individuals
in some cases who just had the raw cognitive capacity for certain modern traits and that,
you know, in some cases they would have been able to institutionalize their insights for a while,
like not everybody has to be in Einstein for there to be a group of theoretical physics
who understand Einstein's insights but at a certain point if we were all hunting each other with spears
we made out of shopping carts or whatever, you know, I mean we probably, probably nobody would
have that anymore and so something very much like that characterizes the long journey of homo sapiens
from our advent as a species until dot dot dot something happened. I should probably resist
the temptation to do that every like five or ten minutes and I think I should just mention real quick
for a little touch of the tragic that, you know, not only do we obviously see this happening
within our own species as one kind of complexity intensifies as the complexity
of the behaviors associated with the overarching, you know, dominant global culture intensifies
as, you know, for instance, science is on an exponential publishing curve and there's, you
know, more and more weird music on the internet every single damn day and all the rest and as
exciting, you know, as legitimately interesting and exciting as I do find some of those things,
those two examples in particular, you know, a different form of social complexity is
correspondingly diminishing, which is of course the complexity associated with
societies that are actually, you know, heterogeneous like not incorporated into this
monolithic global system with a, you know, with a shared sort of like material foundation.
And, you know, so it's like we're losing languages and we're losing like
genuinely different ways of experiencing the world that require non immersion in the
technological, you know, environmental milieu that we all, you know, sort of share to some
degree or another in the global civilization. But this is also happening with various
animals, right? We're losing behavioral diversity as we drive, you know, various
various species of our kin, you know, both in the sense of our closest kin, both in the sense of
actual evolutionary proximity, but also, you know, in that other way we can think of our kin just
in terms of whatever, however recently we share a common ancestor that small subset of mammals
who are particularly behaviorally and cognitively complex, whether we're talking about orcas or,
you know, mountain gorillas or ravens or whatever, we're losing as we drive those
brothers and sisters increasingly closer to extinction. We're losing, you know,
their cultures just like we're losing indigenous human cultures. I'll toss, you know,
I did that episode about the decline in elephant social structure. I mean, admittedly, I guess
we're also gaining complexity in that there's a very like new form of elephant society,
you know, based on aggregations of orphaned individuals with astonishing parallels to,
you know, the behavior of disturbed adolescents of our own species. But yeah, but you know,
we're losing a bunch of traditional elephant social forms. But this is also happening with
chimpanzees. I'll toss a paper in the bibliography about the decline in chimpanzee behavioral
diversity, a great deal of which, you know, is only has only been emerging in fairly recent
history. And, you know, a great deal of which that still exists, I'm sure has yet
to be described and a great deal of which I'm sure has been lost before it ever got
described in very recent times. You know, for a long time, we really, when we talked about
chimpanzees, we were really just talking about Eastern chimpanzees. And then when somebody bothered
to study Western chimpanzees, they found social forms that were radically different and kind
of placed those populations somewhere on a continuum between Eastern chimpanzees and bonobos
because of the greater female social cohesion found in those groups that allows them to
engage in more collective self defense with, you know, correspondingly much lower rates of sexual
coercion and all that good stuff. But yeah, you know, like the stone, the accumulating,
the building of the, of the rock shrines or however you want to think about it,
you know, stuff like that, there's a population that admittedly was subject to some
myth making and some exaggeration and distortion, but there's this very rarely talked about
population of chimpanzees that build nests on the ground, like gorillas, you know,
most chimpanzees like to get off the ground when they sleep at night and they build nests up in the
up in the branches, but also have this behavior that has been described by multiple observers
that who knows what to make of it, but they don't react to human presence, like really at all,
like, like is typical and this may very well be because they don't have the experience of
being hunted for bush meat that is characteristic of most populations, but researchers say that
when they enter their, their territory, they get surrounded by chimpanzees who get really quiet
and just kind of stare at them and they say that it's not threatening exactly that it actually
seems like the, the expression on the chimps faces and they're kind of like weird silent
reverie that they get into would almost seem to convey something a lot more like fascination,
maybe even like a longing for some kind of interaction or something. Yeah, so anyway, you
know, just making the point that, you know, across species and across various, like throughout
various stages of human, you know, the conjoined evolution of actual human biology and human culture,
you know, there's a possibility for a collapse and for declines and fluorescences in, you know,
the degree of complexity or in the presence or absence of a given trait, et cetera, et cetera.
So this process happened over and over again, you know, just one more time and then 100,000
years ago, something happened. All right. But, you know, we do, we start developing more
cumulative progress instead of this patchiness and, you know, this trait adoption and loss,
we have a steady cultural development, you know, previous stages of culture,
you know, and traits stop getting lost and they serve as a reliable foundation for the development
of further cultural elaboration. And, you know, this is the point at which, well, and there's
a convergence, right? Africa is no longer spatially patchy. So traits are no longer temporally
patchy, but also Africa is no longer spatially patchy. And you find the same set of traits,
you know, the same technologies and whatnot throughout the whole continent. So,
you know, the freeze and the fracture have both been replaced by a fusion and a flow.
And, you know, this is the point at which about 100,000 years ago, we've become truly modern.
And we can see this in addition to the changes in the African archaeology, this convergence
and the steady progression. But we can also see this in the actions of our species outside of
Africa, right? Where, you know, various, various species of Homo had been out of Africa for a
very long time. It's been going on for millions of years. But even though we had been all over the
globe, we had tended to coexist with one another so far as we can tell, you know, there was certainly,
there may not have been a ton of overlap between, you know, the actual sort of like home ranges
of different human species. But certainly, you know, in different regions, human species could live
in relative proximity. And at least in the cases of Neanderthals and Denisovans, we, you know,
we know that sometimes their borders did overlap and that just as Homo sapiens reproduced with
both of these different human species, Neanderthals and Denisovans reproduced with one another.
It's kind of like an eastern border there. The Denisovans are, you know, like often like Siberia,
like like far to the east. And Neanderthals have like the western two thirds or so of Eurasia.
Yeah, yeah. So, but there was a zone of overlap. And there was, there was interbreeding, if that's
how you want to think about it, that really may not have been how they thought about it.
And so, but that ceases to be the case, both in terms of the coexistence of our particular
form, the, you know, modern humanity in terms of coexistence with other human species,
and in terms of coexistence with a lot of our prey species outside of Africa,
our presence, the presence of modern humanity, our rapid expansion around the globe is indeed,
you know, temporally synchronous with the extinctions of every single other human species
that ever existed and a huge, huge range of the animals we hunted with a specific bias towards
the larger bodied animals, right. And I have, you know, fairly often talked about this fact
on this podcast. It was only once, way back in the days of the Nature-Nurture Death Spiral series,
that I really kind of got into some of the arguments for it in, you know, derived from
the classic is Martin, Twilight of the Mammoths, and, you know, the papers that he based that
book on. And the primary evidence is always just temporal. It's the fact that there's
nothing in particular climatologically going on in all these different landscapes that humans show up in
that, you know, would account for these extinctions that they happen over a range of tens of thousands
of years, right, you know, and it just always happens to be right when humans show up that
things go extinct. And there's a number of other forms of evidence. I don't want to go into
it right now in any great detail, because I'm going to do so in the very next episode to a degree I
never have, because that episode is going to focus so much on the relationship between social structure
and environmental conditions throughout prehistory. I'm going to present a much more robust version
of how we know. I really just think if you divest yourself of a psychological aversion
to coming to terms with the fact that our ancestors drove a huge number of very interesting and
beautiful animals extinct with, you know, the use of fire and stone projectiles, stone
point projectiles and, you know, the cognitive abilities to drive herds over cliffs and into
swamps and all the rest, you know, there's just like really no good reason not to not to
conclude that that's what happened. I think really the only the the only form of resistance is,
is, you know, is just the difficulty people have reconciling themselves to that. But yeah,
so I'm just I'm just going to say that that happened and leave it at that and you'll have
to wait till next episode for a thorough evaluation of the evidence and, you know,
I think a pretty definitive argument that it's just utterly, utterly unmistakable that that's
what happened. But that also provides this very strong indication that, you know,
something had really changed that, you know, while we're still rolling around, you know,
like you can compare, you know, side by side, a list of like traits that are present or absent
in Neanderthals and in modern humans. And up to about 100,000 years ago, there's really no
difference at all. But then after 100,000 years ago, there's still not like a particular trait
or anything. There's not like any one thing that's happened that is qualitatively, you know,
unprecedented. But the intensity, right, there's something about the sort of like magnitude of
the expression or the deployment of certain traits and abilities that is just fundamentally
different than what had been happening before. And so that, you know, that's one of we see the
evidence in Africa of this great convergence of the regions and the steady progress forward.
Animals in Africa did a much better job of evading extinction because they had time to
adapt to our new hunting methods and whatnot. But but then out of Africa, you basically see
you see this, this whatever this qualitative shift is, you see it in the just mass extinction
that follows us everywhere we go. And yeah, so in the case of both Neanderthals and modern humans,
after we diverged, there's, I really recommend the book Kindred, if you want to just have your
mind blown with a lot of great all this stuff, you know, is we're accumulating so much evidence
in archaeology is just really well, every science is on an exponential publishing curve,
right. So I mean, certainly with all the bio theory stuff I do, it's like, I mean, the difference
between now and like 10 or 15 years ago is insane. It is insane. And it's not at all like the
difference between 15 years ago and 15 years before that, right? It's like the difference
between 15 years ago, and like 50, 75 years before that, I mean, it's amazing. It's the
nature of exponential change, right? But yeah, yeah, yeah. So the if you if you want to just see
a recent treatment of everything we've learned about Neanderthals, I strongly recommend Kindred,
it's a great book. But but what you'll see is this this real significant extent that in the
past would have been severely underestimated, even by people who aren't, you know, so attached
to like that that disconnected sense of, you know, utter human uniqueness or whatever,
the extent to which we were really on pairs, like truly parallel paths, how different elements of
Neanderthal culture were progressing, you know, in like new traits were were sort of developing
and like new levels of intensity, like symbolic communication and stuff were happening with
them that were also happening, you know, with us, even though we weren't in contact, to read again
from this paper, the revolution that still isn't on just this kind of like general broadening
of behavioral and cultural horizons. They say archaeological work since 2000 has uncovered
substantial evidence that the Middle Stone Age features a novel degree of flexibility and
subsistence, diet breadth in the types of occupied ecological niches. From the early MSA,
there is evidence for plant processing through grinding and the exploitation of diverse resources.
The latter range from the intensified occupation of coastal landscapes and exploitation of marine
resources in both northern and southern Africa to a broad range of prey animals,
including large and dangerous species, marking MSA people as capable, sophisticated hunters.
Plant use is more widespread in the MSA than previously believed with the exceptionally well
preserved record from southern Africa demonstrating the dietary use of grass seeds, cooking and
consumption of geophytes and the use of sedges for bedding and as insect repellents by 200,000
years ago and continuing well into the late Pleistocene. So yeah, you know, the human journey
and the parallel Neanderthal journey, which really, I mean, both should just be considered
types of humans, but you know, is definitely just generally characterized by this expansion
of behavioral diversity. And I have always been of the strong opinion that that's the best way
to think about, if you, you know, to think about human uniqueness in a way that
is integrated across like, you know, that integrates the cultural and the biological,
but that also is well founded in terms of our sort of like share, you know, the shared substrate
of evolutionary potentials that we have with other animals and, you know, how what we represent
is an intensification of certain fundamental biological processes that are at work in many
other species, right? You know, the in opposition to that, like abrupt rupture in the fabric of
reality model of cognition, where, you know, the way to think of humans instead of like the
symbol making species or the tool making species or whatever, is to think of us as the uniquely
behaviorally flexible species and to see that in the context of development, right? To see humans
as the animal subject to the greatest developmental delay of any, you know, of any mammal,
you know, certainly in terms of like our lifelong retention of juvenile traits,
sorry, you know, but also in terms of the actual time it takes us to develop and all
that good stuff and to see that as a, you know, as the corollary of that being because
early development is associated with, you know, behavioral plasticity with trying everything
out, you know, that phase of your youth where you're just like, is it an experience? Sure,
I'll take it. The retention of that of an intensification and a lifelong,
you know, a lifelong retention of that fundamental, temperamental reality that,
you know, exists across a wide range of species. And that's, that is a way to think about humanity
that was, I'm a huge Conrad Lorenz fan, he's somebody that doesn't really get cited in a
lot of bio theory. The fact that I bring them up over and over again is one way you can tell
I didn't, you know, go to college for biology. I don't know, there's some, there's some reason
there's it's really weird how he was so embraced for such a long time and then sort of strangely
repudiated in a way that I can only really describe as a kind of intellectual fashion.
But yeah, but to me Conrad Lorenz and his descriptions of humanity as exactly this,
he was one of, one of those early people who articulated, you know, a version of the nyatni
now called the self-domestication hypothesis of human evolution. But unlike that contemporary,
you know, cadre of scholars like Brian Hare and Rangham and them who are more emphasizing this,
this notion of de-selection, of a, you know, selection against aggression, because this is a
trait syndrome that, you know, there's no a priori way to establish which of the many correlated
traits here is actually under direct selection. And Lorenz really tended to emphasize the
behavioral plasticity element of it, right? So, you know, you have to understand because this
is the all these traits are, you know, governed by our shared developmental pathways, you know,
in the development of the neural crest and the subsequent differentiation of neural crest
tissues during embryo formation into, you know, different structures. It's like, sure, you know,
the same process that reduces the size of the adrenal glands or whatever is also a process
that prolongs our windows for social learning and our, you know, capacities for social comprehension
and our degree of behavioral flexibility. So he tends to emphasize that instead of the
selection against aggression or reactive aggression in the Rangham refinement, which I do
think is important, you know, we should expect to see as a feedback loop between all of these
different traits. But he places, if there has to be a primary emphasis, he places it on
the plasticity. And I think that's, I think that's right. I think that's the right way to do it.
And what is interesting that he emphasizes that you still see you really deemphasized in most of
this in most more contemporary evolutionary literature, but it is no less true is that
for as much as it's fun and not entirely untrue, you know, because we are so neotenous,
because we are these like tiny, helpless, you know, baby primates in this way, these creepy,
hypersensient children, right, who have so much in common with like, you know, if you saw the David
Lynch adaptation of the Frank Herbert novel, Dune, right, the like child prophet, the sister of
the protagonist, Paul Maldive, you know, who's like born and with like clearly uncanny degrees of
like sentience and awareness. And as like a tiny child is like uttering prophecies that are
shaking the halls of power or whatever, right, you know, it's like, like as much as it's,
you know, fun and useful to talk about how we don't have like the fur and the fangs
in the claws and the scales that allow other species to sleep outside all winter in the snow or like,
you know, whatever, whatever to kill with their bare teeth and hands. It's not just that we are
like more vulnerable because we started creating environments that, you know, we had like a
greater degree of manipulation, such as the enduring presence of fire or, you know, the construction
of shelter, ability to wear other animal skins so that we didn't have to have fur of our own or
whatever. But the human human anatomy and like our our behavioral capacities also exhibit this
really unique degree of flexibility compared to any other species. I can't remember if I had the
quote handy I would quote Lawrence here it's from somewhere in part and parcel and animal and human
societies but he talks about how there really is no other species that could navigate quite so many
different behavioral modes quite so elegantly that could like climb up a tree and then jump off
the tree into the water and then, you know, swim across the river and then run 20 miles
and then, you know, right that there is this way in which the human anatomy for what it lacks in
like brute power or whatever really does make up for in this like in just incredible versatility.
And yeah, so that is a characteristic that intensifies throughout the course of the human journey
and, you know, throughout the entirety of the middle stone age and the journey of Homo sapiens
but then it intensifies yet again after, you know, something happened after about 100,000 years ago.
Very different kinds of things and so a lot of questions.
How can these two very different types of things essentially exist in totally different planes
interact with each other at all? And Descartes really didn't have a way to understand how the
physical and mental interact at all.