Title: Vivimancer pt 1 the Water Carrier Excerpt
Episode #: 71
Episode ID: 13630767
Source: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/13630767-vivimancer-pt-1-the-water-carrier-excerpt.mp3
------------------------------------------------------------

=== EPISODE METADATA ===
Generated: 2026-01-12 01:02:05
Episode ID: 12886529
MP3 File: 12886529-metamorphosis-pt-2-the-cognitive-evolutionary-avant-garde.mp3
Title: Metamorphosis pt. 2: The Cognitive Evolutionary Avant-Garde
Podcast/Artist: Against the Internet
Album/Series: Fight Like An Animal
Source URL: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/12886529-metamorphosis-pt-2-the-cognitive-evolutionary-avant-garde.mp3
========================
My housemates are working for MI5.
Right.
He thought that the physical world was basically just a machine that got created and this soul substance was, in some ways, just kind of a separate thing infused into this otherwise just purely mechanical world.
What if we had complete freedom to test new body invasive technologies on real people?
Purely mechanical world, purely mechanical world, purely mechanical world, purely mechanical world.
Greetings friends, I'm Arnold Schroeder and this is Fight Like an Animal.
You can find episode bibliographies and other texts at againsttheinternet.com
And if you want to help reduce the number of days where I say it to myself, I have money for this book or I have money for dinner but not for both, please check out patreon.com.
Well okay friends, where we left last time was more or less the conclusion of an argument in favor of the notion that these overarching themes of fracture and freeze could be used to characterize our current trajectory
across a wide range of systems and scales in a whole panoply of different situations that are relevant to the crisis in which we find ourselves.
And that therefore a political process and or an evolutionary process in which we begin to exhibit a greater capacity for integration and greater plasticity,
greater capacity for rapid and radical adaptive variation in our behavior and perception would be the sort of obvious countervailing measure.
The path that would potentially guide us towards whatever degree of survival and future evolutionary journeys into complexity, beauty, and sentience we can possibly contemplate amidst the crises we are currently facing.
You know that that would be the path towards those ends.
And so now today we're going to talk about, you know, we're going to talk more about the processes by which evolution occurs.
And we're going to talk about, you know, if if if where we're going eventually is to talk about what it would be like to try to deliberately intervene in in our evolutionary trajectory in some very fundamental sense.
And what it is like to be human.
Then it seems like a good place to start by characterizing the human evolutionary journey thus far in very experiential terms to deviate from this, you know, this tedious logic of so much of the, you know, the,
I guess mainstream evolutionary theory or a majoritarian tendency there and to talk about evolution purely in terms of the random accumulation of genetic, you know, transcriptional errors that just by wildly fortuitous coincidence happen to confer advantageous traits.
And, you know, the like instead grounding evolution in developmental plasticity and therefore in behavioral choices that organisms make that shape their very biological natures.
A fun thing that I'm going to say not that you have to do this to listen along and understand what I'm saying, but you know you you see all this talk.
These days about just to sound like a real old fucking man, you know, you see people talk about like embodied cognition a lot right this you know this notion that you know we're we're exiting the the phase where we had to insist that there was some sort of like radical
between our, you know, high level conceptual processes and our embodied experience and beginning to acknowledge that things that are happening in our viscera effect, you know, our philosophical deliberations, you know, what it feels like in our bodies might have everything to do not just something to do
but everything to do with how amenable we might find ourselves to notions that say consciousness is a non local phenomenon right something like that you know where it's like people of course are going to do some sorts of logical argumentation in favor of their position, but a very strong
case could be made that what someone's positionality really comes down to in a case like that is what they're experiencing with the experience of being alive in the world is like for them.
So, you know, embodied cognition is this big, you know, maybe slightly buzzwordy, but but totally valid interesting thing that a lot of people are talking about right now.
And, you know, I would argue that we should that this shouldn't be, you know, something that only occurs when we're, you know, I don't know making decisions about whether to go to college in a different city or, you know, figure out what to have for dinner but that embodied
cognition should be if you know if all these accumulating results about it are true, it should be a guiding a guiding sort of principle in doing science and scientific reasoning I'd argue for something like embodied scientific inquiry or something like that.
And so the fun thing that you again can choose to do or not do, as we talk about this stuff is essentially try to feel some of the processes that will be describing that our ancestors underwent in the course of the human evolutionary journey.
So just try to kind of empathetically undergo some of those experiences to kind of feel the boundaries of one's body, not as a definitive permanent absolute sort of affair.
But you know, but as a an interface with the rest of the world that is subject to change right to imagine oneself evolving in different directions in different manners in response to different experiences different situations one finds oneself in.
And yeah, to kind of, you know, the calahari foragers when they're tracking animals often talk about how they can kind of like feel, you know, when they get into a sufficient degree of empathetic relationality with the animal they're following, you know, when they've spent a lot of time making a lot of hypotheses about what the animal is experiencing and doing and like getting more and more into its mind.
They say they can feel its form underneath their skin kind of like rippling and you know they feel its hooves and its musculature or whatever.
And I definitely know what they're talking about.
I definitely have that feeling.
And I do have it sometimes when I don't track the hunt but I like to track, you know, I do have it sometimes when I'm out somewhere, you know, observing wild animals.
But I would say honestly because you know it's the 21st century and life is how it is.
I probably have it more when I'm just hanging out reading about different organisms and what they do in different evolutionary paths that they took right and you know something about reading developmental biology and how a lot of the like wholesale changes we see in an organism
happened actually very rapidly.
You know, I find it very easy to kind of like have a sort of empathic embodied experience of, you know, being some ancestral arthropod and my limbs multiplying with the duplication of a certain, you know, packet of hox genes or whatever.
So, you know, I mean you can think about perhaps engaging with this material in that way if you want.
And yeah, so like I said, you know, the overarching themes of this evolutionary journey we're imagining is one of greater plasticity and greater integration of our perception and behavior.
And I think that there's a very interesting way to talk about the final sort of argument that I want to make in favor of that being the journey that we should be going on is this this characterization that Conrad Lawrence came up for where humans find where we find ourselves right now in
developmental terms in terms of intermediate phases of development being generally perilous. And he uses a number of examples, including you know the fact that adolescence in a lot of a lot of species is like a particularly dangerous time right in humans.
It's cross culturally true that the incidents of certain types of crime and whatnot peaks right around 16, you know, it's like a particularly, you know, it's a time when we've gained a bunch of the sort of capacities of adulthood without a lot of the, you know, reflective
disabilities, you know, we can get ourselves an adult trouble, but we don't necessarily have adult minds to contemplate our behavioral choices. He makes the comparison to species that molt right who have a hard exoskeleton.
And then as they grow, you know, because that exoskeleton is static. They occasionally have to shed it before they can grow another one and so that intermediate phase between exoskeletons is this time when they're exceptionally vulnerable.
And so you could really kind of see how the human journey seems like it's really well characterized as being in this intermediate place where we have developed, you know, like a pretty strongly analogous to one of those early phases of development.
And we can think of humanity as kind of experiencing an adolescence right now, right, where we have certainly developed the behavioral plasticity sufficient to invent the means of global annihilation.
Right. But we haven't quite achieved the behavioral plasticity sufficient to see that we're on a path towards annihilation and say, Oh, wow, fuck this, let's do something else.
And there's something for as much as obviously, you know, it can be pretty alarming to conceive of humans, you know, not as this kind of like final product of like at a terminus of an evolutionary journey, but in the middle of one.
You know, and to, you know, to like really perceive the danger that that implies, but it also really, I think, can be quite exhilarating and invests any given moment of life with this with I think the tremendous significance that it actually possesses I think that it kind of opens our
hearts in our hearts to how truly sacred life is to to really feel that to be walking around, you know, to to be walking down the street to be interacting with the world and having various experiences and to see one's perceptions and embodied
experiences and interactions with other people, not as some telos, not as some terminal phase of a journey, but you know, as an expression of a journey that is underway and to really like actively engage in conceptualizing how what we're experiencing now could change.
Yeah, so anyway, now we will pivot to talking about one of the many ways that that happens. I initially thought that I would do a much longer version of the revolutionary biology series and that I would kind of use it as, you know, that I would try to make it
entertaining by for instance, going on perhaps fanciful, I don't know, journeys into discussions of things like Sasquatch, but like trying to illustrate sort of like fundamentals of just how evolution works.
And I decided that it actually made more sense to kind of just dive straight into the heart of the particular evolutionary process and trajectory that we want to talk about, and to kind of just interspersed these sort of more fundamental biology lessons throughout.
So I know that I read this quote, really not too long ago, but just once again to touch on this idea, you know, to set us up to not think of what an organism is as just a sort of like, you know, a perfect correlation, like a one to one correlation with the gene sequences that its cells contain.
Let me just read this quote one more time from West Eberhard's developmental plasticity and evolution, where she is quoting one Barbara McClintock at the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratories when she says, if I could control the time of gene action, I could cause a fertilized snail egg to develop into an elephant.
Her biochemistries are not all that different, it's simply a matter of timing.
So that's as good a window as any into the paradigm of differential gene expression.
Here's another way to think about it.
So this is from a paper called Human Brain Evolution.
Transcripts, metabolites and their regulators published in 2013 that we're going to rely on fairly extensively in this episode.
So what these authors point out is that the human genome was sequenced in, you know, I believe it was completed in 1994 and, you know, genomes for our close relatives came around not too much longer after that.
And, you know, so these are these are the actual nuclear DNA sequences that we possess.
And, you know, it allowed us to compare the divergences between ourselves and our close relatives like chimpanzees and bonobos in this respect.
And it wasn't terribly illuminating.
Right. And that's there's two things to keep in mind here.
Right. One is that there's a sort of just steady rate.
This is the, you know, the so-called molecular clock that is used to estimate like the time between of like population divergences and a species or, you know, a species divergence, whatever.
But, you know, there's a steady rate of DNA mutation that doesn't really have any particular consequences for an organism that anybody can find.
And so you're going to get genetic differences that just reflect the, you know, the time of sense divergence.
But then also, of course, very similar gene sequences can do very different things because it's what is actually done with the genes that determines what an organism is like.
So the way that they say it is that although the completion of the human and the non-human primate genomes has provided us with a nearly complete list of genetic features specific to humans,
the functional consequences of these features remain elusive.
Genetically, humans are close to other apes.
The genetic distance between humans and chimpanzees or bonobos is on the order of one to five percent depending on the types of genetic divergence considered and reflects the recent divergence of the species.
By comparison, the difference between the common mouse and rat species, mus musculis and ratus norvegicus, respectively, ranges from 20 to 50 percent.
And so, you know, they go on to talk about how narrowing our strategy from just literally looking at the entire gene sequence and the divergences there and between ourselves and closely related species,
how a narrowing of focus has provided some results by looking at human specific genetic changes where it's like a given region has a whole bunch of changes in the human genome,
but not in close relatives, things like that, which implies adaptive evolution at such loci.
You know, so it's like that's that's how we found, for instance, the forkhead box P2 gene, which in times of excessive scientific and media exuberance has been described as the gene for language,
which it emphatically is not because no such thing exists, you know, but but is very much involved in some of the like brain structure and function, you know, attributes that that facilitate language,
you know, and, you know, like a number a number of worthwhile, you know, notable gene mutations have fallen out of approaches of this nature.
But, you know, what one could still say that it none of it really quite feels like a decisive kind of like aha moment, right?
You know, where it really just sort of definitively accounts for truly fundamental differences between human and non human primate cognition.
And then they talk about another approach, the approach characteristic of this paper, they say an alternative avenue of the search for evolutionary changes underlying human brain evolution is the investigation of human specific alterations at levels intermediate between the genome and the phenotype.
And so, you know, what they're what they're specifically talking about is the intermediate products between, you know, observable say like brain structure stuff like that and genes that are the transcripts of genes or the or the proteins that genes make right.
And so here we get into the paradigm of variable gene expression, which I know that on this podcast at any number of points in time, I have used the very term gene expression and talked about how a difference between species or difference between individuals of a species was better
characterized by or, you know, more of the variation was accounted for by changes like differences in gene expression as opposed to differences in gene sequence.
But I haven't really gone any further towards really explaining what that is, you know, obviously, like that has sort of logical and like a logically implicit meaning, right?
You know, you don't have to know anything else about biology to understand like, okay, well gene expression like that has something to do with what a gene is doing as opposed to what genes are present.
Yeah, but, but I think it is worth really sort of talking for a minute about how gene expression differences occur.
So we have something kind of at least like a couple sort of like really concrete physical examples to ground this these discussions in.
And I want to emphasize at the outset that I absolutely cannot even begin to promise anything like a comprehensive overview of all of the means by which gene expression variation occurs for, you know, to like the two really
fundamental reasons would be I don't know. I just don't know them all. I mean, I read a lot of this stuff, but I continue to be surprised by, you know, how often some like pretty fundamental means of genetic variation becomes, you know, I become aware of a new mechanism of this nature, you know, a new
means of gene expression difference, just like sifting through the literature. And then, you know, if I but even with my, like, my imperfect knowledge, if I tried to convey at all, it would be a, you know, certainly the whole podcast, perhaps a few podcasts.
But one really simple example is just it well I'll give I'll give a few so we think of, you know, we, we think of the shape of DNA in a couple different ways and really when you trace the life cycle of an organism in terms of the various shapes that a DNA molecule
takes in the course of that journey, I it's really at a certain point it gets really uncanny in that same way that if you read some like particle physics, and you get into like entangled, you know, like quantum non locality or whatever you
get that that really big rush of, of like just kind of wonder at the universe we inhabit. There comes a moment for me anyway, keeping track of all of these like different sort of adaptive functional behaviors that DNA engages in, in order to replicate
itself in order to differentiate itself between tissues and between stages of the lifespan to sort of, you know, complete the functional, just the functional behavior necessary for an organism to exist and reproduce.
It just gets dizzying at a certain point. There's something, I guess I would say there's something sort of insanely self referential about it, and something that we will kind of keep coming back to in this series and in some other podcasts that we're going to do, looking
at the relationship between quantum theory and evolution. I think a very, very underexplored convergence of scientific realms is that there's some truly fundamental sense in which life is a lot more alive.
I'm just going to say it like that for now. Then I think a lot of scientific thinking makes abundantly clear. Right. You know, it's like, I'm, yeah, I'm going to go ahead and say it because I am going to justify you.
You may really not like hearing this depending on your orientation right now. This is something that I'm going to very extensively attempt to justify in the future.
It really starts to feel at a certain point like there is a lot more of something we might describe as like a will or an intentionality, right? A desire to affect certain outcomes over other outcomes in the behavior of DNA.
And, you know, it gets into the sense of like that really actually being a good definition of what life kind of fundamentally is, yeah, which is something that a lot of mainstream biology I think has done a terrible, terrible job of making clear, you know,
children can recognize, can make like very, very accurate distinctions between living and non-living phenomena. But when biologists try to classify life as opposed to non-life, they come up with these, first of all, they just like admit outright that they can't do it.
And then they come up with these lists of traits that however much they may be useful or useless on their own terms, they're clearly not what a four-year-old child is responding to when they're accurately distinguishing between life and non-life, right?
And these definitions like, oh, well, life is a series of complex chemical reactions that happens in water and it exhibits the property of adaptability, but also self-replication.
But, you know, like, like, obviously that's not what a child is thinking when they say a spider is alive and a sunflower is alive, but a rock is not and neither is a storm, you know?
There's something else that we're responding to. And I really think a strong argument could be made, probably going too far into it right now, because I am going to like actually try to really justify this point in the future.
But think a strong argument can be made that what we're responding to when we distinguish living from non-living phenomena is essentially self-willed action, or self-willed movement in particular, whether that's the slow movement of a plant upward towards the sun,
or, you know, obviously the movement of an animal, right?
But it's movement against the sort of default trajectories implied by external physical forces, right?
So, like, all the non-living things roll down the hill, but the living things might go up it, right?
You know, or all the non-living things diffuse, you know, down a concentration gradient, but the living things concentrate certain materials within their cells, or, you know, all the living things might go upstream while all the non-living things go downstream, right?
That, I think, is the fundamental sort of perceptual category that allows us to accurately, by the way, distinguish life from non-life.
And so, yeah, when you really get, it's a pretty digressive, I'm going to keep it, why not?
But, you know, when you really get into, like, studying the myriad forms that DNA takes, you're really struck by that, how they're, at a certain point it feels like, wow, this molecule wants something.
You know, like, this molecule is, like, engaging in some very non-trivial, functionally adaptive behavior.
So, yeah, but so, you know, we tend to think of DNA in two shapes, right?
In the double helix, you know, famously, you know, DNA are these sequences of nucleotides, and each nucleotide has a complement so that in these double-stranded structures, these double helices, you know, any given nucleotide base is predictably paired with its complement.
And so that is the mechanism of, you know, as Watson and Crick famously said in their one-page paper in Nature describing the structure of DNA, something like it has not escaped our attention that this immediately suggests a basis for the replication of, you know, a basis for inheritance or however they put it.
But, you know, but that is the basis, right? You know, is that one of these DNA strands implies the other so they can separate and then they can produce the complementary strand.
And so, you know, cells can divide and that's how the information about what in order, you know, that's how genetic information is inherited and transmitted.
And then we also tend to think of DNA in terms of chromosomes, right? You know, so these like, it's all in molecule, but there's these like distinct structures, you know, with these like paired chromatids or whatever they're called, I forget.
You know, and those are kind of like the two, those are the two like broadly familiar shapes that DNA takes. But those are really, you know, that's a way to think about DNA in these sort of like distinct pretty limited special moments in the lifespan of an organism or the activity of a cell.
A lot of the time, if, you know, every cell in your body has the same except for, you know, your reproductive cells has the same which have half of a DNA sequence that you'll find anywhere else.
Every other cell in every tissue in your body has the same gene sequences, but they're doing very different things, right?
And when you're just kind of cruising along, when your red blood cells are expressing hemoglobin, which contains, you know, an iron that allows it to bond to oxygen, so that your red blood cells can transport oxygen to all of your tissues so that they can
respire and you can continue to live, right? But not, but your red blood cells are not producing, say, crystalline, right? A molecule that is expressed, I guess it's in the iris, the pupil, I forget, but you know, it's somewhere in the eye and it's related to vision, right?
It's a molecule that interacts with light to help us see things. You know, when you're just kind of cruising along and all of your differentiated tissues and organs are involved in their unique respective functions, the shapes that your nuclear DNA sequences take are not going to be either of those.
They're going to tend to be in these, they're going to, it's kind of like beads on a string is how it's been described, but there's going to be these really like relatively short pieces of purely structural DNA, unassumingly just called linker DNA.
I'm shocked that scientists didn't go for some overstatedly technical sounding thing, you know, like structurally integrating linear sequence, whatever, but like linker DNA that doesn't have any like coding portions or anything like that.
There's no genes in that DNA. Connecting these big spherical structures called histones. And here's the thing is that a histone, you know, the way that genes are transcribed is that there's messenger RNA just kind of cruising around in the cell nucleus looking for gene sequences to bond to, to bind to and to, you know, begin translating into a sequence of, you know, into an mRNA sequence.
You know, and then to move on over to these structures, these protein structures called ribosomes and translate that messenger RNA sequence into a sequence of amino acids right so then you get a linear sequence of amino acids, which because of its internal molecular logic because
the mutations of that linear sequence are going to be attracted to or repelled from one another, you'll get a three dimensional shape, and we'll call that a protein and that's what genes do right coding sequences make proteins anytime you hear about a gene for
adventurousness or musical ability or whatever. Remember that.
But yeah, so you know you just have these mRNA molecules just kind of wandering around looking for a job to do. And so if a DNA sequence is on the surface of one of these big spherical histones, one of these big structures we call histones, then obviously you know like the, the mRNA can find that sequence.
And transcribe it right, but if something is buried deep within that sequence, that's going to get a lot harder and so that's a fundamental means by which different cells exhibit different gene expression profiles is just that these histones reveal different gene sequences and conceal others.
And so a gene, you know, a gene transcription, a gene expression profile is is characterized by taking a sample of a tissue, you know, if it's like, if it's like your skin that could happen just by like cutting off a little piece of your skin.
Obviously, if we're talking about stuff that, you know, if we're talking about brain gene expression profiles, that's only going to be discovered when an organism is dead, right, you know, but so brain gene expression profiles are essentially a matter of taking brain tissue and using the same methods that they use
like a mass spectroscopy and whatnot, you know, using the same methods that they use to just determine the presence and relative abundance of chemical compounds of any variety and any kind of samples I mean, really like the same thing they'd use to determine like if something had some drugs in it or whatever.
You know, they take these tissues and they determine the relative, you know, the presence and relative abundance of different transcription products of a gene. So that could be the mRNA sequence that is like the direct the kind of intermediary between the gene and the protein, or it could be the protein itself.
You know, I think, you know, the whole bunch of different names, you know, call it like the the mRNA transcriptome and then the, I think the proteome or whatever but it's not really important what we'll just call them all gene expression, you know, profiles.
We won't concern ourselves too much with which particular, you know, stage of the the transcription expression sequence they happen to be measuring it just doesn't really matter that much for our purposes for their purposes it does.
But yeah, you know, so that's like that's this way that you know, like, like the shape of histones which genes they bury in which genes they have at their surface allows for this radical variation in gene expression that characterizes organisms right you know because obviously on the one hand, you want different cells to be expressing different genes right
that's, you know, that starts right at the beginning embryo genesis you start these like initial cell divisions and you get variable gene expression profiles that function as kind of like a coordinate system.
At first it's very crude it says things like I'm dorsal I'm ventral I'm anterior I'm posterior right you know, just like very broadly these differential gene expression profiles are like a coordinate system saying where in the developing organism they are.
And then with successive cell divisions and increasingly complex anatomical development, these gene expression profiles which are all like contingent on past gene expression states start to say increasingly complex things like I'm a kidney.
I'm a cell in between two developing digits that has to undergo program cell death apoptosis right so that these these two digits can be independent of what can operate independently of one another you know stuff like that.
So you want different, you know, you want different tissues different regions of an organism to be expressing different genes, but then obviously you also want different gene expression profiles within a given tissue at different times in the lifespan.
Right you don't want the sort of like hormonal profile or any of the like behavior related gene expression profiles that would involve say like adult levels of aggression in a baby or adolescent levels of, you know, exploratory behavior and adventurousness in a baby you know, you want like different gene expression regimes to characterize different stages of the life cycle.
That's that's how that's achieved.
And so, in addition to I'll just real quickly give a couple more examples in addition to histones sort of like physically presenting or obscuring different gene sequences in different tissues at different times in the life cycle.
You also have very complex this is where it just gets into like you have to use like really, really arcane math to map out, you know, these whole sort of like gene regulatory networks because they all provide feedbacks and you know interact with each other and really complex ways where some gene expression like some gene products will bind to DNA itself and
regulate the level of expression of other genes right so it's not just a question of whether a gene is exposed on a histone to a transcription factor you know to MRNA.
It's also like there'll be these sequences before the actual coding sequence of the gene, and there can be quite a few of them like say like five or six sites where different gene products can bind to, you know, to these like switches that, you know, so it's like the gene is keeping
track of the status of a whole bunch of other genes to decide whether and to what extent it should be transcribed, and then it'll sum the inputs from all of these other genes, you know, in in these switches that exist right before the coding sequence.
And then you know the gene can either that not only determines whether a gene gets transcribed but also at what magnitude.
So that's really crucial. So that's, you know, that's probably hopefully I've hopefully I've gone much further than I have in the past obviously like we could we could talk about this all day.
But hopefully that really does sort of ground this idea that the same gene sequences can produce radically different transcriptomes can have radically different expression profiles.
Hopefully this grounds that idea in some like very tangible physical, you know, examples.
And so what they did in this paper is they they looked at instead of gene sequence divergences, they looked at places where this could only be the case for genes that are conserved across these different species right so you know genes that we have in common with
other primates with our closest living relatives. And then they also used macaques as like a more distant, you know, so to provide a comparison between three different species humans chimpanzees and macaques.
They looked at genes we all share for expression differences at different points in the lifespan.
Right. And unlike by just like comparing gene sequence divergences in a wholesale fashion, and I would say even to a greater degree than the more targeted approaches that found genes like the, you know, the fox to P whatever.
Yeah, Fox to P I think that's what it is. You know, I was even to a greater degree than the targeted approaches that found genes like that. These, these comparisons of gene expression profile differences between species were actually like highly, highly illuminating about the
means by which human cognitive uniqueness developed or evolved same thing.
So the sense in which this, this approach was highly illuminating was they see most fundamental human cognitive abilities come online, you know, within the first 10 years of life or so right.
And what they found is that in chimpanzees and macaques, genes that are more expressed in the prefrontal cortex than in other regions of the brain, and that are involved in synaptogenesis and production of synapses.
Those genes peak in their expression.
Shortly after birth, right, there's like a little, little postnatal spike, but you know, by by a couple months after birth, you see the sharp decline in the gene expression products of, you know, these genes that are involved in producing synapses.
So, you know, correspondingly, that's about, you know, that's, that's where you get the maximum synapse density is at that point in the lifespan, and then a process of synaptic pruning succeeds that right, whereas in in humans.
That gene expression curve is massively, massively, developmentally delayed, it is the most neoteness trait that we possess really right so you know we as we've talked about at great length in this podcast, humans exhibit very significant developmental delay across a wide range of
traits with respect to our closest relatives, right, and one has to assume probably feedback loops between a number of these traits right there they're probably probably a pretty wide range of them are adaptive in some sense or another and informed, you know, evolutionary possibilities
are also, you know, further facilitated by other traits in this correlated set of traits, but in this, you know, this trait syndrome, but some of them are probably just kind of along for the ride right you know, like it might be true that the fact that the developmental delay that characterizes humans
sometimes called the domestication syndrome for better or for worse, I would argue for worse, you know, some of the traits like say cognitive plasticity or enhanced social cognitive abilities, you know, like as well as traits like diminished aggression increased prosocialty and social tolerance, these traits
probably, you know, all were sort of adaptive and existed in a feedback loop where each one of them promoted greater fitness and therefore, you know, contributed to the expression of all these other you know correlated traits, but then they're you know stuff like our faces are not just like juvenile but like fetal chimpanzee faces in
terms of the degree to which, you know, we have like our brow ridges protrude and stuff like that. The fact that we don't have body hair. These probably aren't really adaptive. You know, these are these are just sort of like random covariates that come along for the ride because all of these traits are governed by common
developmental processes. But you know, it pretty revealing. It should probably tell us something or other about what of these correlated traits, you know, in this broad in this broad syndrome were particularly adaptive were particularly the actual source of the, you know, the evolutionary
pressure or whatever the response rather to the evolutionary pressure. You probably should tell us something or other about that.
Which traits are the most neoteness are the most subject to developmental delay. And so, more so than say the increased period of dependency, you know, be like the increased duration to maturity in the life cycle of an individual human more so than the
neoteny of a huge range of other traits. The developmental delay we exhibit in our prefrontal cortex synaptogenesis gene expression profiles is like the most neoteness of all our traits according to this paper.
Yeah, and so that really says something right you know we can see this very concrete very just sort of like physically palpable direct link between gene activity and human cognitive uniqueness.
You know, these genes that produce the synapses in our prefrontal cortexes, cortices, just sort of like keep on rocking for years and years and years throughout the human lifespan we grow ever more cognitively complex.
And these fundamental human cognitive abilities come online as the synaptic as the production of synapses continues to just keep increasing and increasing, you know, throughout our early lifespan and finally finally tapering off when we're like 10 years old.
So that's yeah that's highly illuminating about what is different between us and you know our close relatives genetically in terms of you know some palpable sort of like physical basis for the observable phenotypic differences.
So what I want to convey about this now so that gives us a sense of the, you know, here we have entered a more sort of like concrete a specific, you know, physical way of thinking about the plasticity of evolutionary developmental responses you know that that sense in which the language of evolution and the language of development.
It's really it's actually just one vocabulary right and it just really kind of depends on context which terms we decide to use but developmental change is evolutionary change evolutionary change is developmental change and that's a pretty good example.
You know, like the certainly certainly that counts as evolutionary change right what what could be a better candidate for you know qualifying as evolutionary change and the cognitive difference between humans and other primate species.
But it's not in gene sequence divergences. It's just in the developmental process undertaken you know between shape genes that we share with other species.
And so the point I want to make is that's a that's a good framework for understanding the plasticity of development and the plasticity of evolutionary processes but how does this happen.
You know, why does this evolutionary developmental change occur. The point I want to make is that this happens because of behavior.
Right this happens this is it's not like, you know, gene expression profile changes just kind of go haywire and decide to do something different right it's not.
It's not like okay we finally exited the paradigm of all evolutionary change being the result of random gene sequence change.
But now we're into it we're in the realm of evolutionary change just being the still random result of a different genetic process of gene expression.
No no no no no this happens because we are using our brains to full capacity because we are pushing our our self to and beyond our limits right because we are maxing out our cognitive capacities you know and because of course other
sort of necessary conditions are being met like we're getting enough of the right kind of calories to you know promote further brain growth and stuff like that.
But yeah so let's do let's do from the same paper from this brain gene expression profile paper.
Let's just do the the most insane I'll just read from the paper but this is like a kind of insanely brief crash course in a few million years of human you know well all of human evolution from the time of the divergence from the last common ancestor with chimpanzees and
you know so let's just look at the these interrelated facets of you know cranial volume encephalization quotient right the proportion of brain to body size technological complexes and
and then in a little while later we'll talk about some of the actual like gene sequence divergences that are thought to have occur at different times along this trajectory because the type of the type of mutations involved also tells us something very important about the nature of evolution.
So yeah so this is from that paper they say anatomical differences between human and chimpanzee brains changes in cranial size and the human fossil record and archaeological records of tools and cultural artifacts together present a general picture of the evolutionary steps that
have led to the emergence of the human brain and cognitive abilities from the most recent common ancestor of humans and chimpanzees six to eight million years ago until the dawn of the genus homo approximately 2.5 million years ago all early human
ancestors had ape like cranial volumes I do want to note that while they had ape like cranial volumes there there actually is some increase I mean we don't have like a ton of specimens to go off of there's you know there's some increasing cranial volume with the emergence of
Australopithecus but anyway by contrast subsequent homo species had both higher absolute cranial capacities in higher cranium to body ratios also known as encephalization quotients.
For example the early homo habilis 2.3 to 1.6 million years ago had a cranium that was 1.5 times larger than that of modern chimpanzees homo erectus a hominid species that populated our planet between 1.9 million years ago and 200,000 years ago had a cranium that
was initially twice as large homo heidelbergensis another hominin ancestor that appeared approximately 1 million years ago had a cranial capacity approximately three times that of modern chimpanzees overlapping with that of modern humans
whereas Neanderthals from 400,000 to 800,000 years ago to 30,000 years ago evolved cranial sizes that surpassed those of modern humans compared to ancestral hominins increased cranial capacity probably augmented the general and social intelligence of homo species
Encephalization might have been the basis for the older one 2.6 to 1.4 million years ago and a culean 1.8 to 0.25 million years ago that is 250,000 years ago stone tool technologies and could have set the ground for the first out of Africa hominin colonizations undertaken by homo erectus.
Tool used for scavenging, hunting and digging tubers in the subsequent control of fire and invention of cooking are thought to have promoted human encephalization by enriching nutritional content and increasing energy input.
Technological advance access to high quality food and encephalization thus appear to have evolved hand in hand.
However, exceptions to this concept of parallel evolution might exist such as the not yet fully understood case of the small brand homo fluorensia species who used stone tools but had an ape-like cranial volume.
That's an important point that we'll come back to.
So they talk about some of the gene sequence mutations that occur along this trajectory that we'll get to that later but then they say that they're talking about neanderthals and denisovans who have cranial capacities that exceed those of modern humans
and they say remarkably although the late homo species showed an increase in brain size to and beyond that of modern humans their aculean technology 1.8 to 0.25 million years ago mainly consisted of stone flakes and hand axes and made only limited progress for nearly 1.5 million years.
This cultural and technological stand still contrasts with the rapid cultural explosion observed in the archaeological record that started approximately 250,000 years ago and is associated with the appearance of the first fossil remains of modern humans, homo sapiens sapiens.
The first modern human forms appear about 190,000 years ago in East Africa which is in agreement with the estimation for the origin of modern humans based on population genetic studies.
With the rise of modern humans in Africa between 250,000 and 50,000 years ago bone tools began to be exploited and spearheads and fishing appeared.
Besides technological innovation this period also witnessed the first appearance of unequivocal symbolic artifacts such as pigment used by 160,000 years ago and shell ornaments and cave engravings by 77,000 years ago.
There's such a variety of opinions about a lot of these dates and a lot of these thresholds and I don't know other sequences than this could exist.
For instance I think pretty strong arguments can be made that bone tools and you know halting like making a spearhead and then like attaching it to an actual spear shaft probably happened way before they're saying in that you know really solid evidence I think that Neanderthals had such technologies.
One can consult a really great recent book kind of summarizing the state of the current scientific understanding of Neanderthals is this book kindred that I just read and so you know some of these distinctions between us and them as is so often the case.
Any time people try to pause it you know human uniqueness some of these distinctions seem to be kind of falling apart but yeah that's I just wanted to read that to give the broadest courses possible overview of just sort of like the very general sweep of human evolution you know both in terms of anatomy and in terms of technological complexes and inferred behavior right so you know just once again
you know we have 68 million years ago a common ancestor with chimpanzees and bonobos we have this divergence where cranial volumes increase slightly but they stay largely the same and the big difference is anatomical it's in bipedal locomotion you know that characterizes
Australopithecus species like that and that goes on for quite a while and then about 2.5 million years ago you get the Homo genus and you know starting with Homo habilis and you get some of that you know these stone tools start to come online right and then Homo erectus is a very
significant transition and as they say there's this feedback loop occurring between technology and the use of fire and encephalization you know cranial volume proportional to body size because fire liberates all these calories you know it's a way to make food much higher quality
and brains are very very metabolically expensive so fire is a way to you know allow our brains to grow so big but then also I'll just point out that you know the the stone tools stone tools will get a lot of emphasis and a lot of discussions like this and that really may not be
the greatest indicator of like where cognitive abilities are at and don't really necessarily go super far through explaining how you know brain size and structure changes that would underlie complex cognition would have occurred fire and
it's kind of like interaction with social structure I think goes a lot further towards such explanations and so they have there is no archaeological agreement about where fire starts in the human evolutionary journey they've got it up like after you know like less than a million years ago with an asterisk that says timing
uncertain I really strongly agree you with Richard Rangham and others who think that control of fire and consistent use of cooking characterizes the evolutionary transition to homo erectus there's a variety of reasons to think this right so that that that's way earlier when when does
homo erectus emerge that's almost two million years ago right either a variety of lines of evidence we get you know this massive increase in our cranial volume so once again you know like fire would have would have facilitated that but also we have to understand
that fire would have implied changes in social structure it's almost certainly the case that for a long time we controlled it but we had to initially scavenge it right that we took burning material from lightning caused wildfires and then just kept
to those fires alive for a long time before we learned how to start fires and that would automatically imply a division of labor they would automatically imply that there'd be a central place that human groups would return to at night from whatever foraging
or whatever other activities they're engaged in and that somebody's job would be to stick around and keep the fire going are probably multiple people's jobs and that would heavily heavily suggest another transition that's crucial to understanding
our large brain size which is shared care of offspring right co cooperative breeding or you so you know a place on the you social continuum or however one wants to think about it unfortunately as is the case with so many things there's
not really like a unified consensus terminology for this stuff in biology but yeah you know so if you already have a social structure where you know there's some infrastructure or environmental modification that is necessary for the group survival
then you're that's going to strongly favor other types of division of labor so you see this in you know everything from naked mole rats which humans resemble in a number of regards not only our reliance on intense environmental modifications
in our case fire in the case of mole rats underground burrow systems that take a huge amount of collective effort to produce but also like you know we're two mammal species without hair because we both have this intense developmental delay that allows for our
hyper sociality and we also have these massive divisions of labor that characterize our societies so you know and you know including including collective rearing of offspring and so the time to maturity is the biggest predictor across
across species of encephalization quotients of the proportion of the brain size to the rest of the body and the only way that humans can take so long to mature is if mothers have other people to help rear their offspring right there's just no other way other great apes probably exist at a sort of like
cranial maximum you know right where it's like they just can't reproduce any slower and maintain their populations and so that their brains are about as big as they can possibly get without mothers because other great apes species really don't have collective child rearing like we do
you know their brains are probably about as big as they can get without without that so anyway all that is to say you know stone tools aren't the best way to think about the changes that made us human a lot of the time and they get a lot of kind of bizarre emphasis
sometimes but but yeah mostly I just wanted to give some sense of this sequence of us diverging from a common ancestor somewhere around 68 million years ago the homogenous emerging about 2.5 million years ago that's when you start to get bigger brains and then as erectus comes into the picture about 2 million years ago we should probably assume that we have fire and we have like a pretty significant
degree of social cohesion with you know collect with divisions of labor and collective rearing of young and then we move on to homo heidelbergensis about a million years ago and then
continuing on you know we have neanderthals and denosevians somewhere 800,000 400,000 years ago they became distinct species they have larger cranial volumes than us but they definitely never achieved certain aspects of behavioral complexity
so that should speak strongly to this idea that absolute brain size itself or you know encephalization quotients themselves aren't the only predictor of cognitive and behavioral complexity that there is something about brain development right the you know organization throughout the life span that has everything to do with with how we think and you know should therefore suggest that the evolution of further human cognitive abilities should be possible without our brain
size necessarily increasing I think that would also be evident from the fact that you know people obviously exhibit a remarkably large range of cognitive abilities without necessarily exhibiting a ton of variation in their actual brain like relative brain to body proportions right
you know and so then somewhere 300 250,000 ish years ago you get the emergence of homo sapiens and at the same time you get you we've had these two technological complexes the god I never pronounce them right the Aldewan and the culean or whatever maybe that's how they're pronounced respectively 2.6 to 1.4 million years
ago and then about 1.8 to 250,000 years ago and then with the emergence of homo sapiens we have a new era called the middle stone age and that definitely does represent this very significant acceleration of you know technology and complexity of like a parent subsistence
ecologies and stuff like that you know so once again showing that there's not like a perfect coupling between brain size and like technology subsistence behaviors whatever which again we should probably be able to infer from the fact that people with the same cognitive abilities
you know in some cases live in you know societies with monumental architecture and you know complex administrative you know social role specializations and then sometimes those societies collapse you know and they're squatting in the ruins of their former palaces
or whatever but they're all cognitively the same people as we'll see you know a process very much like that seems to have occurred a bunch throughout the course of human evolution but the last thing that I'll mention here in the sequence is that
while homo sapiens proper emerges like 300 to 250,000 years ago something else happens let's say about 100,000 to 80,000 years ago that seems to put us on the very particular course that we are on now
that seems to put us on the course towards another series of changes that happens around the world you know with the advent of complex you know civil with the advent of let's just say civilization and just keep it real simple like that
but yeah so we'll talk about what that is but it does seem like for as much as we are anatomically some people will make this distinction that there's anatomically modern humanity that emerges a few hundred thousand years ago but then they'll talk about cognitively modern humanity
and claim that that isn't something that emerges until you know 100,000 80,000 ish or so years ago so that's yeah that's our incredibly concise story of the entire the entirety of human evolution
purely mechanical world purely mechanical world purely mechanical world
and so there's this kind of funny thing that we should make a distinction about that comes up over and over again that we will talk about more than one time in this episode
you know which is like the search for the the singular decisive categorical you know behavioral threshold or cognitive threshold beyond which humanity emerges right and you know it's supposed to be this this like abrupt rupture from everything that comes before
and that would unite us with you know the cognitive and behavioral tendencies of all other species right this this just singular human quality and
no such thing exists that's not real the fact that it's such a pervasive you know notion that people continue to read you know just like recurrently haunt this frame no matter how many times what they select for the ostensible
threshold of you know cognitively modern human uniqueness or whatever no matter how many times those thresholds end up getting disproven I mean way back in the day it was like tool use and stuff like that right and clearly you know we had to throw all those ideas away
and at a certain point you have to say well okay if people keep coming up with these traits that supposedly radically distinguish us from everybody else on the planet and they keep being wrong you know doesn't that just kind of indicate that this
threshold doesn't exist you know like wouldn't we know it wouldn't it actually just be like really obvious and easy to figure out and I think that what that points to is I mean you know probably on some level like an emotional
and psychological need to claim humanity is more distinct than it is but in particular I think that this gets into this this you know this thing that I'm trying to make a central theme of this whole series
and the tendencies we're talking about transcending which is that I think that there's just an experiential disconnect that we have with kind of like the rest of the world I think that the human symbolic landscape right
the human mental world is sort of so immersive and in many respects kind of beguiling that it tends to just sort of feel like it exists as a truly distinct universe unto itself that has no
continuity with and is not subject to the dynamics of the world in which you know trees grow and blood flows right and that's why you get you know I also think that this is ultimately what underlies the pervasiveness of the nature
dichotomy you know this idea when you know I have found that when I talk about it in the terms I talk about it where I say like well what would be the basis of a capacity for environmental responsiveness other than evolved behavioral competencies
people are sort of like oh yeah huh you know it's like it clicks right away that the nature nurture dichotomy doesn't actually it's not just that it's wrong it's that it's incoherent it makes no sense on its own logical terms
but you know the pervasiveness of it I think is precisely this right because our experience feels like it you know is the result of some sort of decisive rupture from the rest of reality or another right
and that's that's also why you get in the in the social sciences you know 20th century social science that was militating against the notion of human nature you would get all these weird mystical sounding
pronouncements like omnicultura excultura you know like this all of these statements to the effect that there really was this sort of like separate universe in which the laws of physics and biology and chemistry didn't
apply that was the human the cultural the social whatever right but so one of the things one of the things that this will get applied to a lot in discussions of human evolution is tool making and some of it is really just quite funny
ultimately you know these things that people will claim are you know the the behavior the emergence of which indicates this you know decisive rupture in cognition from everything that came before so I read this paper
for this episode called stone tool making in the evolution of human culture and cognition now I don't I want to be kind to this author it's not in and of itself super ridiculous but it's an example of because because they're not really claiming any such you know decisive threshold or whatever
but it's the kind of analysis upon which these claims are often predicated and so he's you know he's just talking about the different technologies the old along the early aculeon the late aculeon or however it's pronounced right and so there's these
there's these hierarchical you know action diagrams he's pointing out that they have a similar structural similarities to language and certain regards you know certain sort of like recursive hierarchical features and what not
but so it's stuff like just you know to give some example of how he's mapping this increasing complexity of the actions and thus the cognition involved in stone tool production you know it's like how do you make an old along flake well okay the you know the top of the hierarchy has like these two bifurcations there's the raw material procurement and then there's the flake production
and you know there's an optional number of you know hypothetical like you could procure raw materials any number of times so you know we can represent that as like multiple branches on the tree you know whatever like with dashed lines indicating that after the one time it's optional
but then raw material procurement has these like sub you know sub actions that superordinate goal is you know is can comprised of these other you know these other behaviors and that's selection and examination right and then examination has its own little sub hierarchy which is grasping rotate okay you know and so that's like that's like
and then likewise flake production has a bunch of these like nested hierarchical you know action sequences like target selection which involves selection and examination and examination once again involves grasping and rotating you know and so the point is that these action sequences
get more hierarchically complex as the tools get more complex and that should say something about our brains you know and the point I want to make is that it doesn't necessarily say anything too particular about our brains right because we could obviously we could make an action hierarchy you
know tree diagram of this level you know of the level of complexity for any of these stone technologies or for that matter of like a much greater degree of complexity for I don't know the construction of a beaver dam or the sequence
of you know symbolic communication that precedes a fight between chimpanzees or elk for that matter you know or a bird you know the process of like doing a courtship dance right you know we could talk about sage grouse and their
lecking behavior you know where they they do these counter ritualistic dances to to show off to prospective mates and they you know prepare an area right we can easily imagine a hierarchical behavioral sequence diagram that's like
prepare the lecking grounds so you know subset of that hierarchical action you know like sweep away debris what whatever like select site and so you know what he's referred to obviously the distinction here is that all kinds of species are capable of all kinds
of really complex behaviors that you can abstractly map out as like being you know like to all these like degrees of complexity that kind of really how complex you want to say it is just depends on how you want to conceptualize it and these don't
necessarily reflect what we mean when we say cognitive complexity exactly because a lot of these behavioral tendencies are going to be kind of like very specific to the species right they won't have come about through abstract reflection on
you know a range of possibilities and then like mental modeling of the outcomes of various sequences of action as opposed to other sequences of action right and so that that's like that's the real distinction and
so the point here is that they're you know there probably is a relationship between the complexity of tools and and the complexity of our minds but you know you'll see just like analysis after analysis where it's like they'll just assume that the the complexity of the action itself is
to tell us that we've like crossed some threshold into like cognitive hyper complexity you know where it's like and then somebody thought to like shape a spear point and put it on a wooden spear shaft and suddenly it's like the lights went on you
and then we went from being morons to thinking like oh we should build skyscrapers someday and it just doesn't make any sense and people are willing to do it about anything but yeah but the point is that these toolmaking skills are presumed to reflect abstract thought itself
right so you know there's a mental modeling of the relationships between different physical processes and so the consequence of that type of cognition is that it's more domain general right so if you can abstract a piece of
stone from a bigger piece of stone in your mind and you can mentally model it as like a blank that you're gonna break pieces off of you know and like gradually shape through a sequence of actions to make like a scraping tool out of it
and you can rotate that object in your mind to imagine what those refinements of shape will look like from different angles right then you're potentially developing skills that could be applied to whatever to rotating the shape of a protein in your mind
to imagine transmembrane proteins that allow water molecules through cells or you know allow you to imagine attaching a firing wire to a blasting cap when you're making an incendiary device or whatever right their domain you know their domain general because of their abstraction
and of course it's like just to be clear about what I'm saying and not saying it's not like other species just live in these like very narrow worlds of like evolutionarily salient stimuli responsiveness where the exact thing that they evolved to give
and competency for has to be happening you know it's like obviously you know like the beaver has like some pretty specific sort of like a behavioral cognitive paradigm devoted to building beaver dams right you know but that's that and a whole
other evolutionary processes have given it a you know a general set of sort of cognitive competencies such that it can see like spatial relationships between things and navigate novel situations like a beaver could have lived in the wild it's
never seen a wall right you know but it could know to go around the wall because it can generalize from other it's you know like if it knew to go around a tree it can know to go around a wall or whatever right
I don't want to go too crazy in like making the distinction between our capacities for abstraction and those of other species seem like too abrupt you know too like decisive of a difference because it's not this is very much a matter of degree
but you know in a way that a beaver's cognitive abilities to make a beaver dam probably don't translate into a bunch of other complex engineering skills in quite the same way they do translate into some engineering skills you know
but it's simpler it's a matter of quantity you know whereas we can apply like the way that we thought up making tools allows us to apply those same skills to a whole huge range of different activities
and so this very act that you know the overarching point I'm trying to make is that this very act of sitting around and imagining a piece of stone being separated from a piece of stone and imagine blows to it occurring at different angles
and pieces of different sizes and shapes coming off of that piece of stone in response and mentally rotating that piece of stone looking at it from different angles that that very process when that is happening at the cognitive limits which is familiar to all of us right
we all have found ourselves in positions where we're thinking about things and we feel like we're kind of right up against the limits of what we can do right you know and then we learn you know it's like that's what going to like math class or whatever is like
for at least for a lot of us right you know there's the moment where we're like yeah this kind of like feel like I'm maxing out like I'm truly thinking about this and it's taking me a minute to figure out what the fuck my teacher is talking about right
and then you figure it out you know but like but that is that experience whatever it is we all have different cognitive competencies maybe some of us never experienced that in math but usually somewhere I don't know maybe you don't maybe you have no idea what I'm talking about right now
but most of us have the experience of like really employing kind of all the faculties that we feel like we have at our disposal and being like alright you know I'm putting I'm throwing everything that I've got at this and I'm going to get there but it's definitely taking me a second
and what I'm saying is that that very experience you know is what we should assume drove these changes in gene expression and drove a whole vast range of other sort of like phenotypic changes that were eventually that eventually translated into evolutionary changes
through processes that we didn't describe you know I wanted to use gene expression to give one very concrete and particularly important example but you know understand that a whole range of evolutionary changes are happening because of behavior
because of experience and then behavior the experience is just sitting there kind of pushing one's limits you know just like writing that line and and what's it like you know what's it actually like let's let's talk about that you know about your
you're a you're a homo habilis or you're a homo erectus and you have your all the one or your acutely on technology and you're sitting there thinking about like wondering if it might be a better way to achieve something or whatever
what are you experiencing as you as you engage in this process of abstract thought at the limits of the neural apparatus you possess for abstract thought you know we can say that you're you're involved in this process of mental manipulation
and then it's so interesting isn't it that that word even though we're using it in this abstract sense to talk about something that's happening purely in the mind it has man in it which I actually don't know this for sure but I assume that the etymology there is man as in like manual as in
what you're doing in your mind is something that you do with your hand you're rotating it in your mind like you would with your hand and you know really like the same thing nearly is happening this even if that etymology happens I don't think it is but even if that happens to be wrong
you know the actual point is that yes indeed like that's happening that something in your mind is happening that would occur you're invoking cognitive processes that occur when you actually physically rotate something with your hand you're doing that you're invoking some of those processes and it's allowing you to visualize that thing rotating right you're invoking this embodied experience
without actually undertaking the embodied experience but you're invoking the same process and it's allowing you to see the spearhead or the scraper or whatever it is rotate more clearly right and that is very broadly characteristic of a lot of what we mean when we say abstraction it's not truly abstract if you look at any sort of like abstract
conceptual system and you translate it through a few degrees of it's the sort of like underlying conceptual structures that it manifests you will quickly get into a realm of embodied experience right where what we're doing when we think abstractly is we are applying very concrete embodied
experience into novel contexts and novel ways to create new ways of conceptualizing you know in this this will happen in a dizzying number of ways involving a dizzying number of neural systems all working together all kind of just like throwing what they've got at the problem so it's
not just true that what's happening in your brain as you're mentally rotating the spearhead or the scraper or whatever it is is that something is also happening that would occur when you were manually rotating something but something else is also happening simultaneously that would be happening if you were being rotated
or rotating yourself right another thing you know like what is it the like vestibular I forget but you know these other parts of your your cognition and your body sort of like spatio temporal orientation that would be involved in you spinning around that'll happen as you mentally rotate
this spearhead or whatever in your mind a great book that talks about whose whole thesis is exactly this that embodied experience that sooner or later if you look at the of the systems underlying our abstract conceptualizations and usually sooner usually it's kind of right there you'll find embodied
experience a great book that explores that thesis is metaphors we live by metaphors we live by was written by George Lachoff and Mark Johnson and the book is kind of delightful because it just it points out things that you never really noticed before about the the sort of you know the
conventions of our everyday language and you know the conceptual systems that link our language reflects you know it's stuff like you know the extent to which understanding something has is so often phrased as grasping it in some fashion or another or you know some other some other
metaphor that involves a sort of like creating a fixity you know like an adherence or something and which I think it becomes particularly interesting when we know that the left brain hemisphere regions devoted to language also seem to have this pretty intimate
relationship with fine motor coordination involving grasping and manipulation of physical objects right you know there's that that sort of like deep deep relationship between the particular conceptual systems we have to kind of like fix our understanding
of something to grasp it you know like both physically and conceptually where like the same neural systems like these like greatly proximate brain regions are involved in either you know they talk about for instance there's there's a section on language involving what is called the conduit metaphor that involves
with you know this tripartite thing where ideas or meanings are conceptualized as objects and then linguistic expressions are the containers that those meanings or ideas are placed into and then communication is like ascending a physical conveyance
you know some of them will kind of sound trivial at first oftentimes we like kind of don't even realize we're using metaphors when we are because you know that these are just so familiar these are so conventional but you know if you think about it for a second
if we say something is hard to put into words again this is such familiar language it doesn't even seem metaphorical and pointing out that it has like these kind of specific physical meanings it can kind of alternate between seeming really profound and really trivial
but so you know in addition to that that metaphor I just the conduit metaphor I just described where right where it's like we are we are putting an idea into words you know so it's like the words are this container that ideas fit into or dumped
you know also this fact that we would say it's hard to do so as a way of saying it's difficult where a different sort of like embodied you know another corporeal metaphor is being used right you know it's it's hard as opposed to soft
right as a repurposing of a set of physical experiences of variable permeability to the general notion of difficulty right you know so the more a surface is difficult to penetrate the more you know it's it's hard and that gets like expanded to this
general notion of difficulty or you know they talk about this very very broad set of orientational metaphors so think about how a statement like you know like if I said that what I'm saying right now I'm
saying in an effort to convey something about the nature of cognition think about how in that statement in an effort to convey something about the nature of cognition I'm using three spatial relational metaphors first of all the
use of the word in this is happening inside of something and then convey right to communicate is to physically transmit or convey something and then the use of the word about to say that it you know concerns
something or relates or regards you know is in regard to something which you know in regard to is itself anyway you know but it's it's pretty interesting how in language after language are prepositions will all have like a spatial
temporal the same prepositions will have a spatial temporal and logical application you know like the word in one can be in time for breakfast right that's its relationship with time breakfast can be eaten in the house but then
breakfast can also be prepared in a manner that reflects my years of line cooking experience or its ecological impact can be measured in land use or CO2 emissions right and so again that's because we take these embodied experiences
you know the spatial and the temporal something can happen in the house it can happen in a given unit of time or whatever and then we extend that corporeal experience into this realm of logical abstraction you know we can
you know we can measure breakfast in terms of CO2 emissions we can cook breakfast in a manner that reflects my years of line cooking experience you know so just to give one more example they talk in their in their section on on relational metaphors they talk about the many many
many applications of up right so happy is up sad is down and they try to give some kind of physical basis for all of these you know so there's like a physical basis of the drooping posture of course you know it's association of sadness and depression but
but probably also I think even like in addition to the actual postural dimension I think there's some kind of like embodied experience where we literally feel a little more elevated when we're happier and you know sort of like like actually
spatially subdued when when we're depressed but you know so that gets used in all these different ways I'm feeling up my spirits rose you're in high spirits I'm feeling down he's really low I you know you never you never rise into a depression you
always fall into a depression right so it gets extended into this conceptual world likewise consciousness up and unconscious is down perhaps this is simply because we lay down to go to sleep and stand up when we're awake
there might be some other sort of like embodied basis for that but you know so you get up you wake up you rise in the morning but then likewise you fall asleep or you drop off to sleep you're never over hypnosis you're
always under hypnosis you never rise into a coma you always sink into a coma right likewise health and life are up and sickness and death are down the physical basis here simply probably that you know illness forces us to lie down
and when you're dead you lie down forever whatever but you know so Lazarus of course couldn't fall from the dead he could only rise from the dead you know you can be in top shape if you're really healthy we would never think to you know say bottom shape was like the logical
extreme of a continuum of health and like if you're all the way at the bottom you're as healthy as possible you never like ascend into illness you always fall into illness you know you don't come up with the flu you come down with it
right your health declines having control or force is up and being subject to controller forces down they say that the physical basis of this is that physical size typically correlates with physical strength and Victor in a fight is typically on top I think that those are correct
but I would also add that you know in species after species there's a sort of like symbolic like stereotyped symbolic display language that's derived from the actual behaviors of aggression and whatnot you know such that animals right like that's why we bow right you know as an active
deference you know that's you'll never find you'll never like see people win a sports comp you know you'll never see the three people who did the best in a sports competition where like the person who came in first place is on a pedestal lower than the person who came in third place
you know you can see how like kings have hats that are like taller than their you know their administrators or whatever you can tell who the Pope is because he's got the biggest silliest hat of them all you know so there's like there's a whole language of like a stereotyped language of dominance and submission
but yeah you know you never have control under someone you have control over them you know you're on top of a situation if you're in control of it you're at the height of your power never the zenith of your power when you have the most of it even though you know
oh wait I mean the nadir you're never at the nadir of your power when you have the most that's what I meant to say not zenith anyway
again we could create a logical schema where the other extremes conveyed that it would make just as much sense you know you rank above somebody all that kind of stuff you know
and they go on and on with this there's more there's more of these and I'm going to get into the future is up and ahead and you know the past is down and behind
good is up and bad is down and then the last one I'll mention well no the last two these are both pretty interesting and I think perhaps arguably the most logically distant right the most abstracted
of virtue is up and depravity is down right you're high minded you have high standards you're an upright or an upstanding citizen and you know this contracts with low tricks and being underhanded and stooping to certain behaviors that are beneath you
you fall into an abyss of depravity low down things right and yeah so that that's interesting I mean this is I guess probably maybe an extension of just this general thing we're like
good is up that might come from the physical you know the physical reality that you're like standing when you're healthy or something like that and then likewise rational is up and emotional is down yeah so the discussion falls to an emotional level it never rises to an emotional level
we always talk about higher levels of abstraction right never lower levels of abstraction for more abstraction yeah so you know that's who knows that that just seems like part of our conceptual hierarchy I would assume that that comes from
that same sort of like conceptual system that places things that are superior in a dominant hierarchy as like being taller or above things that are subordinate and yeah and then like applying that to the conceptual system where in rational thought is like hierarchically superior to emotion whatever
yeah but but so that's all pretty interesting and you know I think I found this to be particularly clear so like to bring this back to the notion of of engaging in domains of thought that feel novel right and that are kind of exercising the very
limits of your capacities for thinking right I have found that this is particularly clear when I'm thinking about new things that when I'm really challenging myself conceptually is when I am most likely to have these experiences of multiple cognitive domains and domains of embodied
experience all sort of like converging and some kind of frenzied you know some sort of like frenzied synthesis into a novel application right you know so like I mean I'm like most people math doesn't come as naturally to me like I like math and I'm good at it but it doesn't come as naturally to
me as other types of thinking and as a result I really miss this I I often think that I should be continuing to challenge myself mathematically just to get these sort of like the general sort of cognitive exercise that I get out of it but you
know back in the days when I was going through math classes the fact that we do bring a whole bunch of like you know various domains of embodied experience to bear on any given you know set of abstract conceptualizations that we're challenging ourselves
with would become really clear because I would just have these experiences you know these very these very corporeal experiences of being you know I'd be like in the graph and you know the rate of change of a function would go down really rapidly
and you know I would feel like this giddy you know like I'd feel my stomach falling out of my body and I'd feel myself dropping with the you know with the the curve real fast and you know like I found you know I find myself like looking up at a graph you know at a curve as it changed
or whatever like I found myself having a huge number of just sort of embodied experiences you know and like a lot of really different sensations you know the visual system coming into play but also like you know the actual sort of like the sense of like
spatial you know like bodily orientation in space and all that good stuff purely mechanical world purely mechanical world purely mechanical world so yeah you're sitting there thinking about the angle you'd have to cut the end of a spear shaft to have to point on to it
and you're having this crazy embodied experience where you're applying spatial reasoning abilities that you would use to predict where a stone thrown in your direction would land so that you could get out of the way of it you know the relationship between angles and one experience is being brought to bear on another
and you're kind of using your whole prefrontal cortex volume in the synapse density that it contains and but the very fact that you're maxing out this capacity
militates in favor of the greater production of this limiting resource right by sitting there concentrating and maxing out your ability for abstract thought you're changing the underlying neurophysiology by which abstract thought occurs
experience changes gene expression right a really concrete example if you want to if you want to validate this experientially in the field as it were and get a very potent dose of the experience of changing your gene expression through experience
you know you could and obviously I'm not actually recommending that you do this but you could go take a bunch of opioid drugs for a little while right and you know you're the receptors that opioids bond to whether endogenous opioids those that your brain produces on its own
or the one you know exogenous opioids that you put into your system the receptors that opioids bond to our proteins they're gene products I think that there's just a sort of like one gene one you know protein relationship there but I don't know and there's no guarantee
because there's you know complexities there like some some proteins you know some gene products get spliced together broken apart by you know subsequent steps in a process by enzymes that do all kinds of fancy things
but whatever the case may be if you if you inundate your system with opioids for a little while you know a couple weeks or so at the most is all it takes the genes that turn out those proteins that sit across the membranes of yourselves right you know that are
partially inside and partially outside so that they can come into contact with opioid molecules they can bind to you know the they have like a shape that matches the receptor so they can bind to the receptor and then that sends a signal into the cell you
know to calm down and feel good and don't experience pain and all the rest you know so you the genes that produce those proteins those receptor proteins will begin to be expressed at much lower levels if they're constantly you know being inundated with opioid molecules
and then if you stop you get introduced to the experience of life without those wonderful substances that mediate the sort of I guess the intrinsic pain or I don't know that that part of it actually isn't super clear like why exactly there's the
particular withdrawal syndrome that there is from opioid drugs isn't abundantly clear but we do understand that you know approximate basis for it is the lack of receptors and that recovering from opioid dependency is you know a process of those genes kicking back
in to produce receptors at a more normal rate and that's one reason by the way is a little practical life hack if you do happen to actually find yourself in that experience you know you have to like sort of already be in
decent shape for this to make any sense but a lot of people find that in opioid withdrawals the last thing that occurs to them to do would be to intensively exercise but if you can make yourself do it oh it helps so much you know go running or whatever
because then the limited number of receptors that you do have remaining will be flooded with your endogenous opioids right and actually makes you feel a whole lot better but anyway right that's you know so that's just just to validate this idea that yeah like whatever you do on these incredibly short time scales in these
you know to these very profound degrees your experience changes your neurophysiology and in particular your gene expression profiles and all these really important interesting ways and then in terms of like what that was like in terms of what the
experience was like of being a homo habilis or erectus or whatever and sitting around and pushing one's cognition to the limits and thinking about these stone tools or whatever you know in addition to the sort of crazy quilt of different cognitive
domains and you know sensations and whatnot that all get brought to bear on this problem this repurposing of different processes you know into a novel context.
A thing that really does distinguish us from other species and if you just kind of if you just like watch some documentaries or whatever and just like observe the behavior of our closest relatives chimpanzees
this is really like you know it's pretty clear it's pretty obvious one thing that really does distinguish us is just sort of like the magnitude of our focus itself right so this experience of sitting around contemplating something abstract
like how to you know shape a tool or whatever the you know like the thought processes per se would be distinct but so would just the actual behavior like the magnitude of just allocating thought to to such a thing which which involves a lot of inhibition
right the prefrontal cortex kind of you know is broadly characterized by by three major functions you know working memory cognitive plasticity and inhibition right you know and the inhibition is sort of equivalent to focus
like what's being inhibited is all the other brain regions and you know all the other impulses that would say like oh look at this you know dazzlingly stimulating bright beautiful world like maybe I should go do this maybe I should go do that maybe I should make some noise
maybe I should and you really see that in other species how they just don't have as much of a sort of like sustained focus of any kind and how they tend to cycle through behaviors and affects and there's this sort of like constant you know this like chattering primate like quality to the behavior of other primates
you know they're very sort of like emotionally reactive and yeah just sort of like a little a little more like a little more just kind of pronounceedly erratic and you know kind of manic I guess and all over the place in their in their behaviors and their affects
and we have to imagine so I imagine that what this was like experientially was you know kind of like if you've ever had an experience where you found yourself just sort of deliberately engaging with your own internal processes to gain greater self control greater capacity for self regulation
and really how like amazing that can be my only experiences of this really run a gamut and I guess I'm really honestly not sure how sort of common they are like how relatable they all are but you know certainly you know I'm sure I'm not alone I've had a number of experiences
that came about through a wide range of means where I've gained a sense of self control that felt really powerful right where I felt like I navigated some sort of like complicated internal labyrinth or whatever and came to this place where I suddenly felt like considerable power where I felt like oh wow like this level of self knowledge I have
this level of just sort of like a capacity to deliberately structure and engage with my like the very processes that generate my thoughts and behavior you know like this feels like I feel like I've gained this sort of like great kind of like meta capacity
you know the most easy one although I know people's experiences of meditating very radically but I think the most easy way to get some sense of this experience if you haven't had a bunch of them before that were like more spontaneous or whatever is just to meditate right I know it's different for everybody
I'm somebody who like immediately I'm just really prone to altered states in general like really really really prone and I can remember being like 12 years old and running after my friend who had like really long hair and all that we were running down a set of stairs and I can remember that everything like
like watching his hair flow through the air as he was in response to the motion of his running and like slow motion and things getting kind of really expansive and interesting and thinking I think that people take drugs to feel the way I feel right now you know and they do
that supposition was correct and I can't count the number of people who know me well who are really into psychedelics who have said something to me at some point in my life to the effect of like oh yeah you don't really need to do that stuff not not like cause they think that I'm crazy and I'll like completely descend into chaos or whatever but you know where they're like yeah it seems like you kind of know what these experiences are like or whatever
you know so like I'm very prone to altered states so like I can meditate for like 45 seconds and end up having this like crazy like really almost full blown psychedelic experience but you know but obviously like drawing on a broader body of evidence than that I know you know
I'm not alone in that people get this sense of sort of like focus that otherwise evades them and it is very much like you know I forget the tradition like I think it's somewhere in Buddhism or whatever but they talk about something like I don't know the terminology
but like transcending the sort of like chattering monkey mind right you know where it's like that that dynamic that like we that difference that we see between ourselves and other primates where they're just so hyper responsive and you know
so just kind of like emotionally reactive to every damn thing you know there's some version of that that still feels like even though we're more externally subdued than other primates like some version of that still seems to be happening
in our mind you know that's just like incessant stream of babble and kind of like constant never truly gratified desires right and and if you meditate for a little while you'll often
sort of become more explicitly aware of that and then as a result kind of no longer inhabit it you know thing that happens to me a lot that I know I'm not alone in is the the sort of like constant stream I know people have very different degrees to which they experience like an inner dialogue like like language
happening in their mind all the time language is usually happening in my mind and when I meditate suddenly I become like really like aware of that fact in a more fundamental sense than I usually am and I have this this process where I be kind of become aware
of the sense that in my day to day my routine activities I'm sort of it's sort of like I consist of multiple entities you know and I'm like huh who is this chattering for right like who am who is talking and who is being spoken to
and which one am I right am I the guy who listens or am I the guy who talks or whatever right you know but it's like this and then as you become conscious of these as much as this also you know can feel a little bit like the beginnings of madness
it you know it's like that that awareness it feels kind of perilous in a way but it also gives you this ability to exit those states and to just be more deliberate in how you conduct yourself in the world but also just like more deliberate in kind of like the internal experience that you cultivate right
and so surely the the production of greater prefrontal cortex volume through focus that changed the gene expressions you know involved in creating the raw volume of our PFCs or the synapse density there in surely these experiences were sort of like that you know involved some version of
like this this sense of greater conscious control that we were able that our ancestors were able to exert over their behavior and their internal states compared to our more distant relatives and now let's also know the touch of darkness that comes along with some of this stuff right as we trace the course of the human evolutionary journey
we should both be you know if we're doing a reasonably good job we should you know are like a fairly balanced one we should both expect to be describing traits that we would wish to see amplified in the future you know we should both be describing a journey we would like to continue
but we should also be explaining how we got here we should be describing some traits that have like a very perilous quality and here is as good a place as any to to mention some of those things like when we speak about this you know this capacity for abstract thought
intensifying and all these cognitive domains being brought to bear on a problem that is kind of separate from anything that's actually happening in embodied experience right then and there if you're anything like me I don't know I guess I don't know to what extent people experience this how common this is but if you're anything
like me sometimes when you're focusing really hard on a very specific technical problem you might have this tendency to do something that very much gets into like very directly has a bearing on these overarching themes of freeze and fracture that we you know began this series
discussing which is that you might really try to kind of arrest the flow like the normal flow of your general experience like it like out of a sense that it would somehow impinge on this sort of like hyper focused reductionist perspective that you're trying to take
right that the noise and the chaos of the full range of experience would prevent you from seeing that acute detail you're looking for and yeah you know so it's like the really I experience it in a very like bodily senses like a very direct process of fracturing my experience into these distinct sub segments
and then sort of like bringing all my attention to bear on just one and trying like I said to sort of like you know like I feel it as this like physical tension in my body where I'm trying to kind of like arrest the flow of everything else that happens
and you know I've really I've examined this process a great deal I've asked myself because obviously to some extent the very notion of focus it like has these logical implications of not really encompassing other aspects of a you know an image or whatever
and so I've asked myself how like really intrinsic I feel like some of those tendencies are like if I can engage in fairly sophisticated technical analysis without doing that and I've found myself will talk more about these kind of exercises as we go along
but I have found that I can kind of decide not to do that and to yeah just sort of defer from some of that initial inclination to freeze and fracture my experience for the sake of reductive analysis and that if I allow a more holistic sort of cognition to be brought to bear on a problem
ultimately it actually even if it feels kind of like uncomfortable or awkward for a minute or you know like a like there's an uncomfortable sense of lack of control there ultimately it actually is a more robust way to look at a problem
inevitably and you think of other examples like you know a lot of the time if we're navigating space if you're like me like I have a really good sense of the cardinal directions and you know really like pretty decent sense of like you know like pretty good
spatial navigation abilities but for the longest time I tended to really abstract the my my sort of like mental map into something that was like a physical map you know into like a two-dimensional planar thing where there were only you know the four cardinal directions
and all that good stuff and you know like had this feeling that that that radical simplification allowed me you know that hyper schematization allowed me to keep things clear in my head and then at some point I really kind of exited that paradigm and started to really just
just corporeally feel that I was on this sphere you know and to to sort of associate my my senses of direction with this actual world we're in and all of its kind of like greater dimensionality and richness and I found that actually my capacity to navigate
it didn't it didn't just not suffer it considerably improved so I think that this is a sort of panic reaction right you know a sort of like an expression of a kind of insecurity or something like that but it certainly is the case that I think that
that has been a prevalent tendency throughout the course of the human evolutionary and developmental journey that it probably has something to do as I've talked about before with the fact you know of the brain hemisphere asymmetries that we exhibit with a bias towards
you know in volume of the left hemisphere which actually looks like it's been brought about through suppression of the growth of the right and you know like again our experience causes these gene expression differences or whatever like I really do imagine
that some recurrent process of sort of like resisting certain elements of our experience that seem like they're going to distract from a technical perspective you know it's probably had some like serious sort of like developmental consequences and likewise of course
this thing that I discussed in the last episode where we do tend to get lost in an abstract schematic of our technical capacities as the you know the world itself like we come to mistake a sort of like map of human constructs for the world you know and if I don't
know if you've had experiences like I've had so many different sort of like specialized tasks that I engaged in you know for huge periods of time in a day you know whatever it is like trimming weed or painting houses or whatever
where then you know if you just like have like a very narrow range of recurrent sort of you know physical manipulations like that you'll kind of go around seeing the world in those terms you know everything will appear as a sort of like it's all like it all
consists of whatever it is you've been manipulating like trees will look like pieces of weed you've been trimming or whatever you know and and you know and just in general we you know it's really easy to see how something like that could happen
our hypothetical homo erectus or habilis or whatever sitting there you know imagining you know the the shape of their spirit or whatever it is it's very easy to see how when we get too lost in something like that the whole world looks like you know the mountains look like
like spear tips and you know everything looks everything can be seen in terms of how it would be separated from a bigger piece and you know subject to successive refinements of shape or whatever somebody pointed out I'm not sure if anybody's ever written like a paper about this or anything
but somebody pointed out in a meme that you know after the wheel was invented a bunch of cosmology came about claiming that the universe was a wheel you know the wheel of incarnation and all that and then likewise when writing became prevalent there were cosmologies
you know claiming that the world was taxed in the beginning was the word and the word was with God and all that good stuff and then of course we entered the machine age and the prevalence of machine metaphors for everything in the world I have noted many many times and I think it gets a little freaky after a while like
people really can't seem you know the kind of like there's this claim that they're simply metaphors but people can't seem to live without them and likewise now there's computers and wouldn't you know it there's all these people who are making these earnest arguments that we must be living inside of a computer
yeah you know so that's some of the darkness that comes along with that you know this danger of seeing the world in terms of our abstractions and in terms of our technical innovations and then also in terms of this you know process I'm describing of becoming more aware of your own mental processes
and thereby gaining greater control like the power that comes with that it should also be noted that when we become really explicitly aware of mental processes we often start to sound rather insane and in fact you know that is one of the characteristics
that's why that episode philosophy or schizophrenia is so named you know McGillchrist pointed out as have many others that those two mental modes are actually far more proximate to one another than a lot of people assume because they both involve this incredibly rigorous kind of reductionist assessment of the very processes of experience
you know and it's also worth noting that really like what we think of there's there's a pretty obvious sort of like convergence between in addition to being like aware of your own mental processes you know abstract thought is of course just being engaged in a process of evaluation of
your engagement with or response to something that isn't sort of like directly occurring in your immediate field of experience which is also a way that you know we tend to conceptualize madness right there there's some pretty deep relationship between hallucinations
and things like that on the one hand and all of these capacities for abstract thought that we glorify on the other and so this paper on human brain gene expression profile differences actually talks of mentions it offhand it's not their research but they mention offhand that a number
of the human brain genes that well a number of the shared brain genes between ourselves and other species that in humans are upregulated in the course of our evolution you know that are thought to be associated with our cognitive abilities are also you know
variants there of are also associated with psychiatric disorders with schizophrenia and things like that right you know so it's like there's really a solid case to be made actually the it's worth quoting they say however the emergence of cognitive skills that allowed humans
to create accumulate and transmit cultural knowledge between generations might have had a cost a rapid phase of cognitive evolution may not have provided sufficient time to fine tune these processes and to render them robust against environmental and natural genetic perturbations
and this may have resulted in the high frequency of human psychological disorders disorders associated with abnormal brain development accordingly a number of recent studies have reported that many more neuropsychiatric disorder associated genes and would be expected by chance
showed differential expression between humans and non human primates so yeah in terms of what the experience might have been like that would have promoted human cognitive evolution I think a decent case can be made that at times and in places for certain people it might have felt an awful lot like going kind of insane
and I consider myself to be you know no no minor expert on what it's like to go insane and you know there's this is where you really got to get into that plasticity that other just sort of core human trait right as I said at the beginning of this
episode there's kind of like a danger zone of plasticity where you have enough of it to achieve something but you know not a sufficient amount to sort of like navigate the plasticity that you do have.
And so there's really something to be said for like knowing how to go insane and then just kind of getting on with your life right the people who are broken are the people who don't know how to bend.
So you know among people who might have experienced a phase of cognitive evolution that felt a little crazy I honestly think the ones that fought it were probably the ones who were more you know destroyed by it or at least are adversely affected by it to some degree and the ones who were able to just kind of experience it probably did a lot better.
And finally that gets into the last kind of like what was this like how how did it feel to be a person undertaking one of these stages of cognitive evolution the last of these I'll do for today and we will do more in the future.
But I feel I had more planned I was going to do a whole other biology lesson about the nature of gene sequence changes that occur in response to gene expression changes.
And we're just going to do that next time.
But you know the last thing that I'll mention is that at this point I may have kind of built built up some impression that you know there's never been there's never been a phase of any human society that I'm aware of.
Where people with remarkable like with unusual cognitive abilities in a particular preoccupation with abstraction a tendency to be really immersed in perceptions of things that other people don't perceive were ever totally socially integrated right.
You know these people are definitely weirdos.
And I think that that probably was a lot of what it felt like to be at the vanguard of human cognitive evolution.
It probably felt a lot like being the only punk rocker in your high school or whatever right you know ultimately behavioral plasticity comes in you know like in direct conflict with behavioral convention right and so many cultures place a pretty intense emphasis on behavioral conventions and don't
necessarily treat people who deviate from them all that kindly and you know ultimately like the kind of plasticity we're talking about it must have just involved a lot of wanton behavioral experimentation it
must have just involved a lot of trying things out I bet at times it was kind of obnoxious kind of obnoxiously avant garde you know I bet there were phases of early human cognitive evolution that felt a little pretentious and artsy at times.
You know certainly the development of language I mean certainly that came about through I don't know why there's there's all these evolutionary discussions about the emergence of language that treat it like it just must have you know of course they have the
you know the gene for language thing like let's do some game theory about gene competition blah blah blah but you know but they also just like in particular like they never seem to focus on any of the sort of like bridging phenotypes between what we see among our
extant great ape relatives and what we have as language but when of course like our close relatives communicate and they communicate with vocalizations and with gestures and all the rest and so surely those very processes just developed into language
we we know this is true through the the neuro anatomy of language you know the Broca's area which is so central to the production of language has a histological homologue right you know I actually like shout out to lucky black cat who's YouTube channel of anarchist media content you should absolutely
absolutely check out for talking to me about some of the biology terms that I throw around and telling me what you know what a clever person who doesn't have a background in biology may not be familiar with so in case you're not familiar a homologue is just
when you know a component of an organism is a sentence like truly the same across across species where the you know the same organ or region of the brain or you know appendage or whatever has just been manifest in different species differently right so you know like our our
hands and our fingers are homologues of the fins in whales you know right things like that and so the Broca's area is a brain region involved in language in us but it has a homologue in other primates where it's not really used in vocalization but it is used in
symbolic communication involving you know facial expressions and gestures and stuff like that so surely early language was like obnoxious performance are right where people are using their whole body like a wide range of vocalizations gestures
expressions and everything else to try to like communicate these points and what I want to point out is that for sure for absolutely fucking sure when some people started doing this with other people there there were there were some people in the group who were like the fucking kids these
days right these weirdo these freaks like I mean you know let's go I mean for sure there was there was the the place to see an equivalent of the football team in some groups that were like let's go beat up the weirdo punk rockers who you know make the strange
noises and like you know have like the specific way that they gesture and annunciate to say sky and then the other one for earth that's weird and gay let's kick their asses for sure and you know more broadly speaking like you can see in you
know even like in anatomically and cognitively modern humans in technologically minimal societies it's been said that you know the shaman you know broadly speaking like shamanism is a very very widespread occurrence that probably has everything to do with
sort of like core aspects of our neurophysiology and all the rest and there are some societies that kind of undifferentiatedly engage in some version of the shamanic experience like the kalahari foragers but in a whole whole lot of societies.
It's just like a certain type of person shamans have been called the first socially differentiated persons and that really that really pans out that that makes a lot of sense because the kinds of people who do it in a lot of technologically minimal
societies let's say you know like circumpolar societies Eurasia stuff like that they do kind of have like a broad complex of personality traits and sort of like relationships with their groups that feel just pretty reminiscent of outsiders
weirdos the world over across cultures and throughout time right you know it's like they'll very deliberately violate the conventions of the group in all sorts of different ways you know there'll be some like cross dressing some deviation from gender
you know some just intentional violation of taboos there's often a physical separation right a shaman will be like of a group and yet not of a group and will will live kind of like on the physical margins right they're on the margins of the perceptual world of a group and then they're
on the margins of the physical sort of like settlement of a group and you know there's a deep relationship there and so you can see in a lot of those societies that they do tolerate these people to some extent they see a certain necessity you know they see that there's
some functional significance that the what these weirdos perceive that they do not is somehow like important and relevant and should be respected on some level but they also harbor you know a ton of suspicion and hostility and the sort of general animosity that people exhibit towards weirdos the
world over you know and obviously people who are having weird you know who are like getting carried off into the land of the dead or whatever obviously these are people who are exhibiting a cognitive plasticity and a sort of like expansiveness of awareness right these are
people who are pushing the margins of human cognition and you know perception and experience and yeah I think that that probably was always true throughout the course of human evolution that you know the evolutionary vanguard was probably always treated as kind of like weirdos
you know think of think of the way that I talked in a while back about how the word left has in so many different languages has this constellation of meanings that we can kind of think of as being applied to magician figures per se throughout a lot of human history and a lot of different cultures
or to just kind of like eccentric weirdo artist freaks in general where it's like it'll mean like clever and magical and sophisticated and articulate but also like evil and weak and gay and weird you know yeah so that's you know that's
that's that's that's my final word and all that is just that for sure to be at the vanguard of human evolution the experience of it was you know to sort of like be willing to deviate from the conventions of a group and to sort of cross thresholds into realms of experience
that weren't socially sanctioned that felt like insanity or felt like they violated a taboo or felt threatening in some fashion or you know uncomfortable in some manner or another and I think that continues to be the case today
you know we definitely live in this very unique society where you know as I've talked and written about before it is kind of like we've reached this phase of culture where there's almost no such thing as a weirdo or it really has a very different definition than it used to
and this is radically reframed all of politics right like when I was a kid as I've written about you know it was totally central to like there was self expression per se and you know any kind of like unique individual expression of identity per se came with like a huge set of
political implications and was vehemently resented and violently ostracized by a considerable majority of people right like having a mohawk or something like that you know like the people who did that some of them were exceptionally bright and beautiful some of them were kind of ugly
but they all really were rejecting you know the society they lived in in this very like real consequential way because people would attack you you know it was like saying to the world like I'm I'm refusing to acquiesce to what you expect of me and you know I'm willing to take those consequences
I'm willing to like get in fights about it because that was inevitably what would happen and you know how I wrote in the world got a lot like the internet about how when I was a kid I mean this was like an uncannily specific experience but it's illustrative of a broader reality
I lived all kinds of different places and in place after place I'd be at like some friends house and the father would turn out to be too racist to eat Chinese food or Mexican food in some cases right but like the mom would like make a meal and the dad would be like what the fuck is this and you know the mom would be like it's Chinese whatever
and he'd be like I didn't you know we didn't like go fight in Vietnam so I could eat this or like whatever something about like the border patrol just like some gibberish right but it was like that was where people were at they were they were so attached to a very narrow range of acceptable forms of cultural
experience and you know like cultural expression and experiences and just like even like diets and all that that they were willing to forgo the considerable pleasures of eating Chinese food or eating burritos or whatever right and this played out in every single realm and egalitarian political perspectives where you
would be ubiquitously associated with freedom of self expression to a degree with those things were so profoundly sort of like conflated those things had such a fundamental conceptual unity for so many people that they couldn't really even
disassociate like you know disassociate them as logically distinct elements of a worldview or a way of being and you know and so that is really like one of the very fundamental things that has changed that hugely informs the current
political and cultural death spiral that we're in is that that's no longer the case at all and there are tons of people who are embracing right wing politics very specifically because it feels less repressive to them.
I'm not saying that it is or it isn't I mean I will go ahead and give a shout out to you know many incarnations contemporary incarnations of what is called leftism or whatever that you know like it does seem like a whole lot of people are walking
on a whole lot of eggshells and it looks really unpleasant and awful and utterly pointless and all that so I'm not terribly surprised or anything I do kind of think that the right wing cultural freak out comes with a bunch of its own you know somewhat
articulated rules or whatever but but regardless you know it's like that's why you know it's like you have all these commentators who are totally bewildered that the right wing can be into like new age bullshit right that they can be
into some like absurd you know wellness you know influencers and you know that there's this convergence of like crystal shaman healing and DMT smoking with like insane you know replacement theory nonsense or whatever.
Then this very real sense in which the right wing is having the same sort of counter cultural freak out that was associated with egalitarian politics in the 1960s and on right you know that that the 20 20s are the authoritarian 1960s and that the difference in open like
the reason for that is there's a sort of different underlying temperamental openness right that psychometric trait openness to new experience varies between these two populations who are attracted to these two kinds of politics.
And so as we you know got past World War two into the phase of you know the post materialist shift the hyper the material hyper abundance that characterized affluent societies after World War two people with more you know a greater temperamental
openness kind of went first and they engaged in their sort of like chaotic you know carnival-esque free for all of self expression self expression right but that gradually the barriers for doing so on the right you know as our culture continued to progress along this trajectory that it's on that so encourages individual self
expression you know IE consumerism really and so lacks for coherent group identities that are founded in material realities. You know the basis of the old styles of political organizing that we used to do that you know eventually say around
16 or so the right wing got comfortable enough to have their own sort of counter cultural explosion. So you know I know that's a little digressive and it's pretty digressive but it's it's an important point it's an important point for understanding how we think about you know
like presenting a worldview or a way of being that is associated with a style of politics right you're never just presenting you know an actual set of political conclusions per se about the world there has to be a broader sort of cultural reality that you're
promoting yeah like a state of a group identity and a you know a set of relationships and a state of being in the world and so what I'll end with because I think that you know maybe the reason I'm comfortable with that
aggression is I think it goes a long way towards you know one of the many ways you can make this point that I keep coming back to that I really feel like our extent political tradition traditions have kind of run their course
have kind of played themselves out and so you know I'd like to like to return to these notions of having cognitive experiences that are kind of right at the boundaries of what is possible what we're capable of and while we emphasize
throughout the course of this episode you know people doing things like rotating stone tools in their mind and reshaping stone tools in their mind and you know like what might be in the like me relating that to say like learning some calculus or whatever so you
know we kind of like talked about it in particular in terms of like technical deliberations and I think those are important those are good skills to develop I really think really do I think there's something to be said for kind of pursuing whatever
whatever feels difficult whatever like mental task feels like it would be the most alien or the most challenging or whatever really strong argument can be made for embracing that particular thing and just kind of you know going wild with it I think one finds that there is some domain
generality in increased capacities that are brought about by such experiences we'll talk more in future episodes in this series about the evidence for different kinds of like mental exercise that actually you know are purported to do exactly that with admittedly
pretty variable results but you know rather than saying like so what we should be doing to further the course of human evolution is you know we should all be like engaging in the most rigorously technical thinking that we can as much as
possible so we become super geniuses or whatever I'd like to you know to like use that rant I just went on about openness and self expression in the sort of like terminus of egalitarian politics as having this kind of hegemony of being
like the the affiliation you automatically have if you are escaping repression right in the sense that you know we kind of like our traditions have died and we don't we don't really have like a clear sort of like integrated politics
culture you know set of like relationships with one another fundamental state of being in the world that we're really like promoting in this you know in this political chaos we inhabit as we encounter our many adversaries we don't really have
like a coherent story about the world and ourselves that we're telling in opposition to the many adversaries that we encounter and so like what I want to point out is that I getting back to these themes of freeze and fracture
I think that there's really something to be said for this notion that all of the extent political traditions into some very significant extent reflect the application of psychological need to
to analysis and to conclusions about the world that do violence to the actual world we inhabit one thing that I often think is that rather than a political continuum that describes how hierarchical people are or how resistant to or embracing of
change in general you know no matter what the nature of the change happens to be is that that one political continuum that I would absolutely love to see is one that erase people along a spectrum in terms of how much violence to reality
must be done for them to form the conclusions that they have about the world and of course I am well aware that it might sound a lot like I'm positing that somebody or other who knows maybe it's me can you know just definitively say what's true and not true
and therefore arrange everybody along the spectrum in terms of the extent to which they embrace or reject the truth right and that's not it at all I what what I would say is that there are sort of like characteristic subjective processes that we engage in when we're doing this kind of thing that there's a way that it feels when we encounter truths
or at least tentative indications like of a potential truth that we feel uncomfortable with that cause us to compartmentalize information or to arrest the flow of a logical process in order to avoid it's
terminus in order to avoid its implication right and you know that in general a lot of world views rather than being characterized by people taking you know like sort of invoking all of the same variables and all the same evidence and then for some reason just taking
different paths through that evidence and arriving at different conclusions what a lot of variation in world views really comes down to is an a priori temperament that causes people to only really allow themselves to invoke a limited subset of evidence or
you know different types of reasoning process or different forms of awareness and relationships to the evidence of the world that is at their disposal that they then navigate to a somewhat predetermined conclusion and again that you
know no external arbiter can really plausibly you know say who's doing this to what extent but that it feels a way and that the processes I've been describing of trying to like compartmentalize information or stop sort of like reasoning
processes from reaching their terminus to you know like arrest certain thought processes to exclude certain things from our awareness if we're paying attention and we're being honest with ourselves those you know those are apparent you
know when they're happening on some level even if we normally don't want to talk about it one way that I also think about this you know more in the positive terms like what what characterizes not doing this what characterizes
really just sort of engaging with the world as it is and not trying to fit the world into some sort of like preconceived set of contours that we feel comfortable with you know I think that this can be characterized by we can ask this
question to what extent in the formation of one's worldview one's politics whatever to what extent has one truly engaged with evidence or potential you know like like reasoning processes or potential conclusions that felt genuinely identity threatening
I hope that terminology makes sense because that's about the best way that I can think to phrase it that's been my experience right that's the best way that I can characterize the times in my life that I've given really sincere
thought to things that I felt really really disinclined to acknowledge because I would just you know I would just reiterate that this is so much of what the modern perceptual landscape looks like the landscape of worldviews or whatever
right it's all of these hyper specialized forms of reasoning that are rarely like wrong unto themselves but where they have just contracted so radically right the example I gave last time is if somebody is opposed to you know relationships of like hierarchical
domination let's just say for instance and it you know it they are aware as a result and in fact they tend to really hyper emphasize as a result the the aspects of social structure that place people in positions of you know being exploited
in positions of disadvantage that don't have anything to do with who that person fundamentally is or their you know behavior or the choices that they make right but then at the same time maybe it gets kind of tempting to exclude from
one's worldview to exclude from one's process of reasoning what would to any other person just be self evident truths that you know variation and how people behave in variation and choices that people make obviously does have some consequence for you
you know what happens in somebody's life right that you know so that like any number of variations on processes like that characterize the world views that so many of us possess and when I say that you know we can kind of tell that we might be on the right track
when we are willing to engage with forms of evidence or reasoning that feel identity threatening I guess to give an example from my own life you know what else can I really do the the biology that I so frequently site in this podcast that is kind of like the the fundamental you
know the the sort of like foundations the the scientific foundations of all this work this developmental biology associated with developmental delay and increased cognitive plasticity and reduced aggression and all that good stuff
you know the there was a time when I thought that that biology was just monolithically something that I was sort of opposed to and the way that I started investigating it was that in 2010 or so when I was living in
the area of Washington and I had access to evergreen you know it's like this very rare university library and just letting whoever student or not come access their collections I you know it was I had this kind of like typical radical environmentalist like typical
animosity towards domestication in general and I was like I want to understand more about this biology of domestication so I started reading some papers and as I did so I suddenly became aware that this very that this sort of like core
conviction that I had gone through at that point like 20 years of my life really ardently maintaining you know the sense of like wildness is good and domestication is bad and that's just that and anything that's you know there's a very like clear line that can be drawn through phenomena
and anything that's on the domestication side is just stupidity and weakness and you know blah blah blah blah blah and as I came to see that the situation was far more complex and that that biology was actually central to human evolution
I mean I really felt like you know the world was kind of I felt like the ground was giving way underneath my feet I mean it like wasn't comfortable and it was easy for me to see right you know like I had some version of the reaction to that stimulus
that had I you know had that like been allowed to just sort of like manifest to its logical conclusion how I simply indulged it completely you know would have been a process of simply excluding that from my awareness of simply shutting down that you know those forms of evidence
and the logical implications that they contained and saying you know like like coming up with some garbage you know some garbage argument in opposition to it and you know continuing to like maintain this dogmatic perception that felt identity
validating for whatever reason I guess you know maybe in its most fundamental terms because I've just always kind of had like I've always felt kind of in conflict with the settled way that people live and I've always been really I
don't know sort of appalled by how acquiescent people are and how completely completely I don't know just sort of debasically dependent on comfort and you know predictable environmental predictability and whatever else people
are like I've always felt like kind of a wild person in this really confusing conflict-ridden relationship with the civilization I was born into I don't know whatever like for whatever reasons that that felt threatening it felt identity threatening
but of course that's the thing right is that it's pretty generally true that anytime there's something you don't want to come to terms with but then you step up and you go ahead and allow yourself to be annihilated by your new awareness of the world and then you allow
yourself to be reconstituted in the strength that you've gained by being willing to confront any truth by being an adherent of truth itself by relentlessly and veterately pursuing knowledge and awareness on their own terms regardless of where they lead you
or how it makes you feel in a given moment you gain this power as a result right and so that is kind of like the the cognitive limit or the experiential limit that I would like to suggest that we you know could maybe
end this episode thinking about pushing ourselves to in different situations would be in opposition to the fracture and freeze we employ in trying to calculate trying to navigate this hyper complex world and come to conclusions about it and you know in classifying
different groups of people different social phenomena different sort of political tribes and all the rest and the ways in which we tend to do violence to reality to construct a picture of the world that feels good to us in some sense or another
you know whatever that happens to be whether that's concluding that everything is hopeless so we don't have to do the challenging work of asking ourselves what is our obligation to do to you know telling ourselves that the Green New Deal is going to fix everything and so we don't have to
you know accept the challenges of asking ourselves what we really need to do or whatever it is right you know the ways in which we don't want to see ourselves and certain other people who are awful the ways in which certain arguments that challenged cherished beliefs seem like they might have
some core of validity whatever it happens to be but that process of pushing ourselves into a more I guess I would say like agile like a more nimble state of awareness where we can readily navigate through a wild panoply of truths which at times
may you know engendered sort of like dispositions in us that feel in conflict or whatever but you know to really try to encompass the true complexity of this utterly bizarre dream like hallucinatory reality we inhabit to live up to this strange beautiful
world that we are a part of and to attempt to push our minds to their very limits in terms of comprehending the beauty and the strangeness of this world until next time friends thank you so much for listening and we will talk against
to test a new body invasive technologies on real people since the dawn of science direct technology testing on real individuals has been an ethical nightmare this was a problem for ancient physicists and doctors and it's now a problem for modern scientists
however this doesn't seem like it's going to be a problem for Elon Musk
apparently having things finding things inside their bodies like implants and bits of technology
what if we had complete freedom to test a new body invasive technologies on real people
substance dualism comes from that there are two different many other ways but just to kind of summarize what the problem is that he sets up is he argues that the human person is essentially these two different substances two very different substances
completely different substances which is where the term substance dualism comes from that there are two different kinds of substances one is a mental substance and the other is a physical substance
and these two kinds of substances we make it up to the human person
now there are two very different kinds of things and so a lot of questions rise and come up
how can these two very different substance and things essentially take this thing to two totally different planes interact with each other at all
and Descartes really didn't have a way to understand how the physical and mental interact at all