Title: We Are Fighting a War to Keep Our Hearts Alive
Episode #: 78
Episode ID: 15133096
Source: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/15133096-we-are-fighting-a-war-to-keep-our-hearts-alive.mp3
------------------------------------------------------------

=== EPISODE METADATA ===
Generated: 2026-01-12 01:02:05
Episode ID: 11925784
MP3 File: 11925784-narcissists-strongmen-and-technocrats-pt-1.mp3
Title: Narcissists, Strongmen, and Technocrats pt. 1
Podcast/Artist: Against the Internet
Album/Series: Fight Like An Animal
Source URL: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/11925784-narcissists-strongmen-and-technocrats-pt-1.mp3
========================
What if we had complete freedom to test new body invasive technologies on real people?
Since the dawn of science, direct technology testing on real individuals has been an ethical nightmare.
This was a problem for ancient physicists and doctors, and it's now a problem for modern scientists.
However, this doesn't seem like it's going to be a problem for Elon Musk.
In about apparently having things, finding things inside their bodies like implants and
bits of technology. What if we had complete freedom to test new body invasive technologies on real people?
Substance dualism comes from that there are two different many other ways, but just to kind of
summarize what the problem is that he sets up is he argues that the human person is essentially
these two different substances, two very different substances, completely different substances,
which is where the term substance dualism comes from, that there are two different kinds of
substances. One is a mental substance and the other is a physical substance and these two kinds
of substances we make it up to you. Now there are two very different kinds of things and so
a lot of questions rise to this. How can these two very different kinds of things essentially
exist in two totally different planes interact with each other at all? And Descartes really
didn't have a way to understand how. Greetings friends, I'm Arnold Schroeder and this is fight
like an animal. You can find episode bibliographies, text versions of a great deal of the same material
we cover in this podcast and my contact information at against the internet dot com.
And if you want to keep my neurotransmitters awash in the dubious cocktail of chemicals
necessary for me to make the elaborate and far-reaching connections between disparate
domains of scientific and political inquiry, which are at the heart of this work, please
check out patreon.com slash biological singularity, where you will also get access to occasional and
as my health returns to me post kidney transplant and my ability to produce becomes
a great deal more reliable. I'm going to go ahead and say you'll receive access to
monthly there. I said it. I'm holding myself to it. Installments of a fictional
version of this podcast fight like an animal 2050, wherein an even more ancient and weary
version of myself than the one you currently encounter reflects on the revolutionary adventures
that allowed us to survive to that day. Oh, that's right. And I forgot to hype this recent
podcast YouTube appearance. So I'm going to awkwardly insert it into the existing recording
now. But yeah, check out I very recently in the last couple days had a conversation with
Alex chairman of the auto machination YouTube channel for his artifact series. And in the
artifact series, there's a book or a, you know, a work of art of some variety, some some cultural
product that is assessed. And our our cultural artifact was Ted Kazensky's industrial society
and a future which would make two times that I've showed up on somebody's podcast to talk
about Ted Kazensky. The other time was the swamp side chats discussion of Kazensky's
anti tech revolution. Why and how is that how and why something along those lines.
So I will put a link to that in the bibliography for this episode. But I'll go ahead and
read the description so you can get a sense of it. In artifact number 34, Alex Cheromet is joined
by radical climate activist Arnold Schroeder of the fight like an animal podcast to discuss the
industrial society in its future. They tackle Ted Kazensky's claims about leftism and political
psychology, his timeframe for ecological collapse, his use and misuse of terms such as freedom
and more in assessing the unabomber manifesto, they conclude that while Ted Kazensky is
often labeled insane or a genius, he is in fact neither. Rather, he is very much within his milieu
as well as a statistically likely end product of his times. So that is the publicly accessible
YouTube video that we did. That's that's a couple hours. But then you can also if you want to
toss Alex some dollars on Patreon, get access to another conversation that we had immediately
subsequent our B side, as it were. And we talk about, you know, it's a it's a little bit more
personal, the conversation we talk about the development of our perspectives, and the you
know, the circumstances, and the trajectories of our lives that facilitated the development
of those perspectives. So beside topics, Alex is unbelievable banana, because we were talking
about, you know, sacrificing things like being able to go to the grocery store at three in
the morning and buy a banana to live in a society that is not self annihilating.
Political turning points for Alex and Arnold Schroeder, Arnold's activism and upbringing,
the nature of the nature of the 1990s, political illusions, 90s versus 2000s internet,
message boards, sever hosting, the over willingness for everyone of all ideological
stripes to be subsumed by fads, lingo, non expression, how right wing elements used
liberal professional middle class empathy, the failure of social movements, narrowing of political
possibilities, Bill Clinton's once in a generation political talent, technological
stimulation and human contentment. Great, sprawling, really interesting conversations.
I just realized doing, you know, hyping these shows, looking at these numbers,
Alex doesn't have nearly enough attention on his work as he deserves. So check out the
Auto Machination YouTube channel and the Artifact series thereof, and again, a link will be in the
episode bibliography at againsttheinternet.com.
Okay, friends, I need your help writing my book. The attempts that I have made thus far,
I produced before the current incarnation, I produced, I think it really was five drafts
of this book, some of which were maybe just like a few thousand words, and some of which were,
you know, like 40,000 words. And in each case, I was just utterly dissatisfied and that process,
the production of this series of, you know, iterations of this text has a very, very distinctly
familiar quality, which is this process that I seem to go through when I'm absolutely certain
that something I'm trying to achieve or produce is like the easiest thing in the world, second nature,
right? This podcast was very similar, where, you know, I wanted to model the format that I wanted
to present it in was kind of like really just based on doing workshops and skill shares and
whatnot throughout my political life, you know, I've always been a giant fan of the free school
in its many different permutations and contexts, you know, so I thought that this was just going to be
like telling some people at the earth first campfire about federal environmental policy
or teaching some people, you know, about how to blockade trains or, you know, teaching whatever.
I mean, I, for a great deal of the time that I have been making this podcast and,
you know, probably like 15 distinct times in my life, I lived in a house called Doomschool,
so named because, you know, we were teaching classes about how, you know, how to navigate
the collapse that we are in. So, you know, I thought that between my love of writing,
the fact that I like had the material already, you know, sort of like pretty reasonably well
mapped out and my general affinity for teaching and lecturing and doing workshops
and skill shares in general and also just like my sort of general affinity for performing in any
capacity, you know, since I was a 15-year-old punk rocker, I've loved getting on stage, you know,
I've often argued that I can just kind of get up in front of any group of people and say or do
something that they'll get some value out of. So it did not occur to me that making a podcast
would be hard and then when I, you know, opened up my laptop and pressed record, it felt
a lot like I was a guy in a bedroom opening up my laptop and talking to it and it did not feel
natural at all. And I think that I, you know, I attribute that mostly to the lack of a social
component to the experience, you know, I think I've never done a performance musical or like
performance art or whatever kind of storytelling where I didn't do something unexpected, like
unexpected to me in the course of a performance, like a good example, a dramatic and therefore
a good example is that the one and only time I've done a front flip ever in my life, I mean,
admittedly, it was off of a stage, so I had like an elevational advantage, but you know,
it was in the course of a performance. I certainly did not plan on doing it,
which is all to say that like I tend to feed very heavily off of the actual presence of
people and like, you know, the interaction, it's a very, let's say, if you're familiar with this
terminology from organizing land, you know, I'm a very momentum based performer and speaker,
as opposed to what's the, what's the emphasis like the structure based, whatever it is, you
know what I'm talking about, if you know like the Saul Linsky versus, I can't remember
people's names, Piven and Cloward, I guess, right, the like rules for radicals versus poor people's
movements, you know, sort of like paradigm in a movement politics, but I really, really had to
just go through like these endless permutations, it felt ridiculous after a while of just like
trying out different formats of like talking into my laptop and being like, Hey guys,
here I am and here you are, except you're not, but I'm going to pretend like you are,
it wasn't natural and eventually I feel like, I mean, you know, maybe the podcast is good,
maybe the podcast is terrible, but I got to the point where it felt natural in any case, right,
and then I experienced something very similar. There's like I said, this is a familiar process
from a number of different domains is that's the podcast is a good example, but this has
happened a number of times in my life and yeah, I just, as I tried to write this book, which
once again, I was like, I know what I want to say, I've been making this podcast for a couple of years,
so I like seriously have like all these outlines and these bibliographies and you know,
like a lot of great notes, it shouldn't really, it's not like I don't like to write,
it should be fairly straightforward. And it just really wasn't. And so I had to,
I don't think deceive myself for anything, but I mean, no, it wasn't self deception,
because here I am reading from the first two chapters of my book, but at some point,
I just had to decide that I was going to write for the podcast as well. The book chapters
were just going to be podcast episodes. And the moment that I decided that it all,
I'm always when I make things just searching for this feeling, right, you know, like I don't
have any means of like objectively evaluating material or whatever. There is a feeling that I get
when I'm producing it that tells me that, you know, again, whether it's good or bad,
it's what I have to offer that I'm living up to my own potential, like whether whether that
potential is, you know, worthwhile or not. So, you know, I instantly felt like I had
access to the feeling that I'm looking for in writing something. And so now friends,
I'm going to read a couple chapters. I'm going to read the entirety of the first,
what I believe now is the first chapter of this sixth draft of my book, which feels like the
actual draft, you know, like the actual book, there have been considerable structural
rearrangements. I've approached, you know, what are essentially really the same sort of
arguments with a bunch of different frames and, you know, from a bunch of different perspectives.
But here we very fucking well are. And so I am going to, I think that I'm not going to read
the whole second chapter because I'm just going to try to make podcasts that aren't like three
hours long, if there's no desperate necessity to do so. So, you know, I'll be back with
more of this. It's not the only format I'm going to do. I realized as much as obviously having like
every word explicitly mapped out diminishes the rambling potential that, you know, I admittedly
do have. But I also actually found, you know, it's funny, like as I as I considered like
recording this, I also did kind of realize that I sort of like I like the conversational
quality. I like hanging out and just talking and imagining, you know, like mentally modeling the
interactions that I'm having with various people, you know, and like feeling like I'm kind of there
with you in your car or in your kitchen or whatever the case may be. And I, yeah, so I, you know,
this is not going to be the only version of Fight Like an Animal. But as I continue to
write my book, I will continue to make these podcasts. And then the texts themselves, I think
that I'm not going to post on against the internet. I think that I will coerce people into giving me
at least $1 a month, which is exactly how much it become it costs to become a patron.
You know, it's very much the passing a hat version of doing a show as opposed to the
having a door person version of doing a show. I'm not really trying to create a barrier. I'm just
like, you know, I'm just asking if you got something to toss it my way. But that can literally be a
dollar a month. So yeah, so I will I still have to clean up this text and add the bibliography,
which is always more work than I imagine it's going to be. But that'll go up on Patreon
relatively soon. And the material we're going to be exploring today, there's like kind of just this
brief introductory chapter. It's really, really rather concise and just sort of like sets us up
to go into chapter two, which is called Narcissus Strongman and Technocrats and explores my
framework for understanding the psychology of power basically in the types of societies we
live in. And I'm very careful to distinguish between the versions of power that exist in
dominant hierarchies, as opposed to the versions of power that exist in egalitarian societies.
The way that I conceptualize it is like these three types of power that have essentially like
an egalitarian and a hierarchical mode, but ultimately, you know, like rely on somewhat
similar mechanisms, you know, that they are in fact like these three fundamental types of power
that are exercised in any given type of society. So I didn't do the first chapter doesn't do like
a ton of framing or whatever. And that's kind of what chapter three is like what I what I
ended up doing for better or for worse is like this brief introductory thing that launches us
into Narcissus Strongman and Technocrats, which is considerable, you know, like a very substantial
substantial text. And what I find with a lot of this stuff is that a lot of material that I feel
is essential to toss somewhere into the mix. It's almost like it's almost like I can arbitrarily
choose a frame, like I can, I can start almost anywhere in this landscape of material
and refer to various aspects, you know, various things that I want to bring in, you know, within
that frame. So I use the Narcissus Strongman and Technocrats frame to talk about a whole bunch of,
you know, like our misconception about the automatic nature of social form emerging from,
you know, technology, ecology, subsistence mode, demography, things like that. Not that I
don't think those things are important, right? But that in like, you know, I then kind of
use that to launch into chapter three, which has a sort of like, you know, so as you can see,
it's actually important to use biology to understand social, sociopolitical conditions.
And, you know, so then I kind of jump into what could have conceivably been the very
introductory portion of the book, like the first chapter or two, where, you know, it's called chapter
three is called biophobia and its consequences. And it talks about the concrete effects on our ability
to strategically engage in politics and to construct a story about the world that actually
fucking makes any sense to people, and has any hope of catalyzing the mass transformation of
consciousness that should be at the heart of any meaningful project of sociopolitical transformation.
So yeah, so that's where I'm at now. And that's as far as I've gotten, we're into chapter three,
and we're about, oh, I don't know. I actually have no idea what the word count is. But so yeah,
today, let's let's check out chapter one, a scientific case for revolution and chapter two,
a narcissist, strong men and technocrats, or at least the first like one half to two thirds of it.
Okay, fight like an animal on the intersection of behavioral science, revolutionary politics,
and ecological collapse. I don't really know if that's the title of the book. I haven't
given it that much thought, but we'll say it is for now. Chapter one, a scientific case for
revolution. Understanding any sociopolitical condition, any aspect of the human trajectory,
requires coherently transitioning between multiple levels of explanation. We can subdivide these
levels further or perhaps categorize them somewhat differently. But a tentative checklist might read
something like one, ultimate evolutionary causes of behavior, two, proximate mechanisms by which
evolution translates into behavior and generally constructs the traits it does. Three, species,
typical behavior, the recurrent aspects of social organization across different contexts. Four,
individual variation. Five, environmental factors. We might call these material conditions if we
want to sound that way. Or we could say demography, ecology, technology and related
variables if we want to sound like that. In six, cultural conditions and politics per se,
the stories we tell about our place in the universe, and our deliberate efforts to shape
societies. Obviously, all explanatory levels exist in a relationship of reciprocal influence
with all others. Biology shapes politics, but likewise politics shapes biology. The forms
of society we produce reflect our evolved behavioral and perceptual capacities,
and these capacities have in turn been shaped by ancestral social environments in their politics.
Individuals exhibit an extraordinarily wide range of variation, and variable individuals can exert
outsized influences on cultures, causing others to emulate their particular human potentials.
If one restricts oneself to a single explanatory domain, or perhaps a few,
something deceptive occurs. Some of the variation we observe in human life is, indeed, explained,
and some simply isn't. The temptation, of course, is to ignore what is poorly accounted for,
and to advocate for the limited explanation as decisive, absolute, and all-encompassing.
If, for instance, one were to reduce all of history to conflicts between economic classes
constituted by people who lack any particular behavioral or cognitive architecture,
or to species typical modes of social organization, exclusively recapitulating forms we also find
among chimpanzees, one will certainly be able to explain aspects of human life, but just as
certainly not its entirety. History has, on occasion, after all, defied the expectations
of both Marxists and evolutionary biologists. It is my argument that the vast majority of social
theory lacks coherence in precisely this fashion. It is not that it is wrong, so much as that it is
incomplete. To a certain extent, this is perfectly reasonable. Everyone cannot be an expert in
everything. So long as we pursue our specialized inquiries in a fashion that is amenable to
integration with inquiries on other explanatory levels, in principle our knowledge can progress
towards some kind of singularity. But the fact that we cannot be experts in everything, that
conducting brain imaging studies on the neurophysiology of aggression leaves little
time to examine the psychological corollaries of dogmatic thinking, or whatever, is specialization
in its most trivial sense. I believe a more fundamental, experientially potent form of
fragmentation has engaged us. I believe that in our hyper-complex societies, encounters with
particular truths leave us resistant to acknowledging other truths. On a level of abstraction that
places human societies alongside other complex systems, we can say that any system that grows
more complex grows more differentiated. Bacteria is less complex than eukaryotic life,
precisely in the sense that eukaryotic cells have numerous functionally differentiated components,
like a membrane-bound nucleus, bacteria, lack. Technological mass societies marched to ever
greater complexity has likewise entailed a differentiation of its constituent parts,
our experiences and our worldviews increasingly diverge. Some of this is perhaps because
complexity is simply baffling, but I believe to really understand the fragmentation of perception
we are currently experiencing, it is important to note that there are deep motivational underpinnings
from maximal differentiation from others, at both the group and individual level,
in a feedback loop between technology and psychology that promotes versions of reality
accommodating of the most extreme manifestations of one's unique cognitive biases as possible.
Embracing any given truth in this set of conditions often has the very distinct quality
of becoming psychologically resistant to others. Take for instance left-right divisions over perceptions
of innate human variability and socioeconomic conditions. That both factors shape individual
outcomes has been rigorously and exhaustively demonstrated to a point I consider beyond any
reasonable dispute. Heritability studies have quantified the genetic contribution to the observed
variability of countless traits, and plenty of research has demonstrated the hard limits on the
expression of this variable human potential that socioeconomic conditions impose. One simply cannot
attain coherence in attempting to explain individual life trajectories without employing
both of these factors. But to a degree that is difficult to overstate, left-right disputes
have precisely this quality of one set of explanatory variables being employed at the expense
of the other, quoting from Avi Tushman's Our Political Nature, the evolutionary origins of
what divides us. The leftist morality follows from the following premise. Even though the world
is filled with many unlucky souls, all people share a fundamental equality of moral worth and
potential. Because leftists are more likely to believe in innate inner equality of all people,
they attribute the world's inequality to outer structural injustices. Conservatives,
on the other hand, are more likely to believe that hierarchies reflect inner individual
capabilities, be they moral, intellectual, or physical. Inequalities, according to this
worldview, reveal the worth of the powerful in the weak of winners and losers. Thus,
the right has a high tolerance for inequalities. There is obviously no intrinsic logical reason
that these explanatory factors cannot be synthesized into a coherent unitary framework.
And it is worth noting that doing so does not simply result in some hypothetical median
perspective. This is the difference between synthesis and balance. Synthesis incorporates
all the relevant variables in explanatory modes and, at least quite frequently,
produces something qualitatively distinct from them. In a sense, it is a mode of transcendence
of the terms established by inhabiting explanatory levels in isolation. But balance is the exact
opposite. It is the ultimate acquiescence to extant perspectives and modes of reasoning,
searching for their median. It is not simply both a little bit true that socio-economic hierarchies
reflect virtuous innate qualities not everyone possesses, but also a little bit true that we
are constrained by our social conditions. Such mediocre claims, I leave for centrist op-eds
about restoring civility to internet dialogue. A truly integrated explanation, I believe,
is that socio-economic hierarchies do indeed reflect innate qualities possessed by those who
impose and ascend those hierarchies, but that these qualities, rather than virtuous,
are some of the very worst to be found in our species. A serious examination of the diversity
of human societies in the full range of innate human variation leaves us little choice but to
see our current social systems as a ludicrous journey to annihilation guided by people who
utterly consumed by their own self advancement have absolutely no awareness of what is happening
around them. It is precisely this journey to annihilation that I wish to explain. I wish
to understand why, in the very brief time, in evolutionary terms, that cognitively modern
humanity has inhabited this earth, it has been so utterly ravaged. I wish to understand why
we find ourselves at or beyond the brink, depending on who you ask, of self-perpetuating ecological
collapse, which even if we did no further harm, threatens to end all but the simplest forms of
life. Unlike the politics of, say, incarceration or voter disenfranchisement, which can suffer
tremendous setbacks but never necessarily reach a decisive point of failure, ecological
politics are subject to acute temporal parameters. I will not attempt to predict which conceivable
trajectory will unfold nor assign probabilities to any of them, but catastrophic outcomes are
sufficiently likely that I believe we can say definitively that our politics have failed us.
I wish to understand whether and to what extent the path we find ourselves on is an
inevitability. Such inevitability could exist at any number of levels. At the most
fundamental, it could be true that any self-perpetuating system will, if not constrained from doing so,
exhibit the dynamics of indiscriminate growth followed by collapse. Or it could be true that
some self-perpetuating systems lack this property, but that all organisms possess it. Or this
tendency could be an inevitability specifically with regard only to our species. Or the
circumstances we find ourselves in, in the course we took to find ourselves in them,
may be utterly wrought with contingency in only one of many potential scenarios,
which would naturally engender the question, what potential exists to change course?
What can we work to save, perpetuate, or prevent? Comprehension is worthwhile regardless
of the outcomes our planet and species experiences. It is both the means of
confronting the adversities we cannot overcome, and the means of mobilizing our capacities to affect
what we can. My concise answer to the question of why we find ourselves in the circumstances we do,
is that the societies we inhabit are dominance hierarchies, and that dominance hierarchies
mobilize certain human potentials at the expense of others, including empathy,
and the broad forms of awareness necessary to comprehend ecological realities.
To understand this state of affairs in any detail, we must transcend the binary nature
versus nurture logic that so frequently characterizes left-right perceptions,
and examine in detail the intrinsic relationship between individual variation and hierarchy.
As the anthropologist Ruth Benedict has phrased it,
the problem of the individual is not clarified by stressing the antagonism between culture
and the individual, but by stressing their mutual reinforcement. This rapport is so close,
it is not possible to discuss patterns of culture without considering specifically
their relationship to individual psychology. We have seen that any society selects some
segment of the arc of possible human behavior, and insofar as it achieves integration,
its institutions tend to further the expression of its selected segment
into inhibit opposite expressions. But these opposite expressions are the congenial responses
nevertheless of a certain proportion of the carriers of that culture.
In other words, only a certain proportion of humanity has the behavioral and psychological
profiles that characterize dominance hierarchies. Or in any case, only a certain proportion finds
this the most immediate and amenable of their potentials. The whole arc of possible human
behavior, I believe, does indeed reside somewhere in all of us. Our differences are
best conceived of as a continuum of reactivity, as differences in thresholds.
Some of us even find, despite the attempts of the prevailing institutions to inhibit our
egalitarian tendencies, that we live lives of profound conflict with these institutions
precisely because they further the hierarchical segment of the arc of possible human behavior.
To live in a dominance hierarchy is to live in a society in which power has accrued in the hands
of a certain type of person, and in which others are shaped by that power. The kinds of awareness
possessed by those who take hierarchical power and the kinds of awareness they promote in others
with that power simply is not responsive to the ecological crisis.
This oblivion is hardly unique to the ecological crisis. What those who are ascendant in hierarchical
societies share is a frame of awareness that has been massively constricted in pursuit of power.
We shall describe three varieties of such people, the narcissists, strongmen, and technocrats,
wielding, respectively, charismatic, coercive, and technical power. It is worth noting that
this tripartite scheme corresponds roughly to Max Weber's notion of traditional, charismatic,
and legal power if we substitute tradition for physical domination, or note that physical
domination has indeed been a traditional foundation of power. And it corresponds more or less perfectly
to Graeber and Wengro's formulation of sovereign power, control of violence, administrative power,
control of information, and charismatic power, a perhaps unsurprising correspondence considering
the degree of overlap in our respective bibliographies. All these forms of power maintain dominance
hierarchies, but all have counterparts, distinct in their modes of application but clearly related
to the same mechanisms of influence in egalitarian social structures. The claim
that those who inhabit institutions of power simply don't find the ecological crisis psychologically
salient may run counter to the impression generated by the earnest promises of massive
interventions offered by the liberal segment of those who inhabit these institutions.
But the radical disconnect between such rhetoric and reality is a window into the mind of
charismatically powerful individuals, the narcissists. In using this term, I don't
necessarily mean to refer to everyone who would score high on the narcissistic
personality inventory, but a subset of such people. The most extreme form of the personality
I'm referring to is what others have dubbed the right man, who is found presiding over social
formations ranging from terrified families to religious cults to totalitarian mass societies.
And it's less extreme manifestations, however. We still find charismatic figures who are
narrowly focused on self-assertion at the expense of empathy in such figures as Barack Obama,
offering soaring rhetoric about staving off planetary disaster while presiding over a doubling
of U.S. oil and gas extraction by expediting the regulatory review process of new infrastructure.
Such figures have always been at the head of states, and states have always claimed that
rather than existing for the reason dominance hierarchies exist in all other species in which
they are found, to advance the material interests of a minority at the expense of a majority,
that they are grand projects uniting humanity and transcendental objectives.
James Scott has termed the inevitable self-aggrandizing mythology of states their
cosmological bluster, noting the radical disconnect between the material reality of
states and their marketing campaigns, quoting from Scott.
The nature of the official histories of the court center systematically exaggerates the power,
the coherence, and the majesty of the dynasty. The court documents that survive are largely
tax and land records on the one hand, in hymns of praise, assertions of power,
and claims to legitimacy on the other. The latter are meant to persuade and to amplify
power, not to report facts. If we take the cosmological bluster emanating from the court
center as indicative of facts on the ground, we risk, as Richard O'Connor has noted,
imposing the imperial imaginings of a few great courts on the rest of the region.
In other words, a few millennia or centuries previous,
one would find the same sorts of people inhabiting the same configurations of power,
claiming at a minimum to have united a vast territory into a coherent polity, and just as
plausibly claiming to be descended from deities or the earthly incarnation of the sun, who today
we find standing in front of podiums ensuring us that they will guide humanity through the crises
that beset us and into a glorious new epoch. Such claims should be regarded as belonging to
precisely the same category, and should be taken precisely as seriously, as the claims of Elon Musk
to be colonizing Mars, or of the founder of the WeWork office company to be, quote,
revolutionizing every aspect of human interaction, or of the Heaven's Gate cult founder Marshall
Applewhite to be preparing his followers to board a spaceship. We can perhaps most easily refute
the exalted, rational, and benevolent nature claimed by states and other entities of coercive
resource monopolization by the simple application of parsimony. The primatologist Franz DeVall provides
a breathtakingly concise and coherent definition of a dominance hierarchy, saying that biologists
know they are observing one anytime they witness one animal run from another in the presence
of food. Dominance hierarchies exist to provide differential access to resources. The landscape
of resources varies by species, and there are some true novelties, such as hierarchical status
determining access to bathing and hot springs among snow monkeys. But food and sex are very
recurrent themes. As in humans, dominance hierarchies and other species have a decidedly
institutional character. A strong evolutionary imperative exists for fights within a species
and within a group within a species to be non-lethal and to establish long term power relations
rather than outright combat being necessary anytime a potential conflict arises.
As a result, the behavioral repertoire associated with aggression is the basis of a set of ritualized
displays that validate the existing hierarchy. In a number of species, for instance, subordinates
spontaneously perform a stereotyped version of a submissive behavior that would be used to indicate
having lost a fight when they encounter a dominant individual. None of this exists to unite
wolves or chimpanzees or any other species with a dominance hierarchy in a grand consensus,
or for any of the other reasons that are claimed as the basis of the state.
Although it should be acknowledged that alphas in some animal societies do have burdens of
group decision making and conflict resolution, but so do leaders in egalitarian societies.
The ultimate foundational reason for hierarchies, the property they inevitably possess in all
species in which they are observed, is differential access to resources. To take
seriously the justifications for our hierarchical social form is to posit an entirely different
set of causes for a social structure when it is found in humans than when it is found in any of
the many other species who inhabit such structures. In other words, it is to radically disavow
parsimony. I am sympathetic to those who wish to catalyze a strategy for averting extinction
from within existing political institutions. The aforementioned acute temporal parameters
of ecological politics can make whatever means of intervention or hypothetically already the
best developed seem like the only real option. Revolutionary approaches can seem, therefore,
to poorly reflect the magnitude and pace of the crisis. And it is easy enough,
from such perspectives, to attribute to revolutionaries a childishly oppositional
psychology, more concerned with power dynamics than the broad outcomes of power dynamics.
I should even emphasize, because a significant motivation for this writing is to convince those
who wish to work within existing systems of power that revolution is the only viable option,
that I have spent much of my long political life doing the kind of work that reformists do.
I have lobbied Congress, spent years and meshed in the minutiae of federal environmental law
appealing national forest timber sales, have crafted and campaigned for policy proposals
ranging from the entirely politically plausible to the highly aspirational. I am no stranger
to the desire to wield imperfect forms of power to achieve desperately and immediately
needed ends. But I believe the reason that the benevolent claims of the charismatic figures
in charge of our lives can be so beguiling is because we would never make the kinds of statements
they do, you know, the ones where they promised to save the world, insincerely. If you or I were
to stand in front of some podium and earnestly proclaim our commitment to staving off global
collapse, we would absolutely mean it. This is one example of how coherently integrating
multiple levels of explanation can yield qualitatively new political insights. In this case,
seriously examining humanity's massive range of psychological diversity and relating this to
social structure can help us transcend self-referentiality. It seems that a great deal of
what constitutes politics are cases of people failing to do exactly this. We could note how
those who believe an ethnic outgroup intends to harm their own group are precisely the people
most likely to engage in such persecutions. Or that a person who believes that if we simply
commit to non-violence, violence will cease to be a determinant of power may not be very
accurately describing the world, but are certainly telling you something about themselves.
By seriously engaging questions of the ways in which our perceptual and behavioral modes vary,
we can learn what truly motivates others, and therefore undertake efforts to actually communicate
with them, rather than communicate with a version of ourselves projected onto another.
However, transcending our self-referentiality also implies seeing darker motivations in some
behaviors than we may have previously, and acknowledging where conflict may indeed be
inevitable. In other words, a serious scientific inquiry into our circumstances,
integrating multiple levels of explanation, shows us where dialogue may not be possible,
and revolution is the only option. This is precisely my intention,
to make a scientific case for revolution.
Chapter 2 Narcissists, Strong Men, and Technocrats
Let us apply our checklist of explanatory levels to the people who are dominating our lives and
driving us to extinction. Everything from musical aptitude to adventurousness has a strong component
of heritable variation. And the traits that are salient to both perceptions of society and the roles
individuals inhabit within societies are certainly no exception. The science of individual difference
helps us understand why these traits are deeply inter-correlated, perceptions on the one hand,
the sociopolitical conditions and individual desires, and actions on the other, the modes
of contestation in individual employees in pursuit of desired sociopolitical conditions.
One will never encounter a campaign to institute a fascist society through nonviolent protest,
nor a mystical religious sect exterminating its orthodox counterparts for heresy. Obviously,
this deep relationship between worldview and mode of contestation is a primary determinant of
political outcomes. Ultimate Evolutionary Causes
So we begin with the ultimate evolutionary causes of the complex landscape of trait variation
that influences the configurations of power we inhabit. Why does this landscape of individual
differences exist? The explanations fall into two broad categories, those that posit adaptive
causes and those that posit randomness. The more an explanation emphasizes randomness,
the more it emphasizes the mechanisms of trait construction, our next explanatory level.
So we begin with the adaptive explanations. Tigris Alamanders exist as one of two types,
called developmental polyphenisms. One is what you might think of when you hear Tigris Alamander.
The other, which only occurs when populations become very dense, is significantly larger with
specialized jaws for cannibalizing their smaller counterparts. Obviously, this is only a viable
form of variation when it is uncommon. There are approaches within theoretical biology that
look for adaptive advantage to within species variability, such as negative frequency dependent
selection, the notion that certain traits are adaptive and thus under direct selection pressure
if they are relatively rare. There is some empirical validation of this concept. For instance,
the Bluegill Sunfish exhibits two distinct mating strategies, parenting and cuckolding,
associated with distinct developmental trajectories. The former mature over a longer period of time
and build nests. The latter mature rapidly and sneak into nests others have constructed.
Approaches like negative frequency dependent selection can account for only a relatively
small proportion of the observed variation within species, however, because rather than
discrete trait variants lacking any intermediary forms, such as cuckolding versus parenting,
what we actually observe are continua. One simple evolutionary explanation for these
ranges of trait variation is that there is no single trait optimum. If we look at the personality
dimension, which in humans is designated openness by the widely used five factor model, we can easily
see how varying circumstances would reward different degrees of openness to novel experiences
and behaviors. An individual who is willing to sample no unknown foods risks starvation,
while an individual willing to constantly and indiscriminately sample
anything that might turn out to be food risks poisoning. We can also see how a range of
dispositions in a group where some sample the novel potential food item and some refrained
could increase a group's evolutionary fitness. We might go further than to say openness has no
singular optimum. That the question of whether and to what extent to institutionalize behavior
into a stable regime or to pursue novelty is one of the deepest in organism faces,
potentially beyond resolution, even by the profound wisdom of evolution.
Support for this notion exists in myriad forms, from the fact that our brains consist of two
hemispheres, which apparently have very different answers to questions of fixity versus flexibility,
to the existence of distinct life histories within species such as orcas and ravens,
with some remaining stationary in a territory and some living lives of constant exploration.
There are evolutionarily significant trade offs associated with all varying traits. These
trade offs have been examined, for instance, with the dimensions of the five factor model
of personality. Extraversion implies better chances of forming social alliances,
but also a greater likelihood of physical injury. Neuroticism implies vigilance to dangers,
but the physical and mental consequences of a perpetual anxious vigilance are hardly trivial.
Although the terminology is diverse, variable traits with a clear mapping to the five factor
model are widely distributed across species. Conscientiousness may only measurably exist on
our very close relatives such as chimpanzees, but the remaining four, openness, agreeableness,
neuroticism, and extroversion are found across a wide variety of taxa with very distinct
ecologies and evolutionary histories, from octopi to cats to donkeys, quoting from a paper.
Consistent individual differences in the average level of behavior across time and context exist
in a range of animal taxa and commonly explain greater than 30% of the phenotypic variance within
populations. These differences are now commonly referred to as animal personality
in the behavioral ecology literature. In essence, each individual does not express the full range
of behavioral trait values present in its population. Obviously we can connect that with what
Benedict said about humans, right? This broad distribution of the same trait variance suggests
that a great deal of within species differences may be somewhat random. If selective pressures were
actively shaping the ranges of variation we observe, wouldn't we expect different species
to exhibit variation in different traits? The fact that these dimensions of personality apply so
robustly to animals living such radically different lives suggests that the variation,
while certainly a significant predictor of individual outcomes, may be incidental to the
processes of trait construction. And here is where I must diverge from the more abstract,
model-centric approaches to evolutionary theory, where I feel it would be poorly
received to suggest that traits with significant consequences for individual fitness may be subject
to significant random variation. One can object with equations that show how some hypothetical
mechanism for narrowing the range of trait exhibits would allow an organism to out-compete
those lacking such a mechanism. But so long as that mechanism is hypothetical, I remain deeply
skeptical. Biology generates all the diversity and novelty we experience in this world, but
it is also wrought with constraints. We cannot assume it will produce a given outcome simply
because we can demonstrate it would be mathematically advantageous to do so. The ability to kill
with mental effort alone would be evolutionarily advantageous, but so far, no gene has coded for
a protein that enables organisms to do so. This skepticism about a strict adaptive logic
underlying all individual variation would be reinforced if we look at the frequency distributions
of the five-factor model traits within human populations. There is some meaningful variation
in the central tendency and the range of distributions between cultures, but within a given
culture, personality scores exhibit a normal distribution or a bell curve with the majority
of individuals clustering around the central tendency and relatively few individuals at the
extremes. A very large number of traits such as height, blood pressure, and IQ have such
distributions and it is exceedingly unlikely this is all the result of selective pressures.
When a trait varies continuously and normally, it seems reasonable to suggest that the processes
that produce it vary continuously and normally as well. Another evolutionary frame for understanding
personality difference is in terms of life history stages and strategies. Let us again
use openness as an example as it is a fundamental predictor of many of the socio-political perceptions
and behaviors with which we are concerned. Openness is, for instance, a better predictor
of left-right political perceptions as measured by questionnaire responses and political
behavior such as voting than socioeconomic status, sex, or ethnicity. The only demographic
variables acknowledged in a great deal of political discourse. This relationship is so deep that
political perspectives that are skeptical of social innovation and argue for the conservation of
tradition are often conflated with, or indeed identical with, political perspectives in favor
of hierarchy. Think of the very term conservative. Likewise, a politics of embracing novel social
configurations is often a politics of egalitarianism. In evolutionary terms, openness is clearly
indirectly related to the notion of behavioral plasticity and to the life history stages of the
critical period and dispersal stages associated with youth. A wide range of animal tax that go
through a developmental phase called the critical period before behavior institutionalizes
into a stable adult regime, quoting from Trutt's paper on her experiments with the domestication
of silver foxes in Russia. The sensitive period of such adaptation or primary socialization
is known to begin in the early postnatal development by functional maturation of
sensory systems and locomotion. Owing to that, the animals can perceive the environment and
respond to it. The development of the fearful responses regarded as a factor that substantially
complicates, if not altogether blocks, the processes of their exploration of the social
environment and adaptation to it, which is true for all animals, regardless of the level of their
social organization, end quote. Developmental changes are a major driver of evolution.
Species that retain greater flexibility into adulthood than their close relatives
retain other traits associated with early development, from skull shape to social
behaviors to vocalizations. In many species go through a dispersing phase in early life,
in which the propensity for approach behaviors and amenability to novel stimulus and to strangers
is increased. So we can see how variation and openness in sensation seeking and the pursuit
of novelty and tolerance of uncertainty or phrased in the negative in the disregard for
stability and security is associated with development and individual differences in this
domain within a species may be thought of at least partially as the differential expression of
paradigms associated with various life history stages. The notion of stable individual differences,
personalities, being derived in part from a universal developmental repertoire
is a validation of the notion that we all contain the potential for
the entire arc of possible human behavior in Benedict's phrasing. We can recall from our
own experience how we were truly different people in different developmental stages,
which helps justify the notion that the capacity for all behaviors and perceptions exists
somewhere inside every one of us, even if these latent capacities will never cross the
necessary thresholds to actually be expressed. This notion can be transformed from a fuzzy intuition
based on our developmental experience into a formal empirically validated and mathematically
precise one with the notion of reaction continua or behavioral response norms.
Plasticity has its general meaning, but it also has a very precise meaning in the science
of reaction continua, where it is integrated with measures of personality and fields such as
behavioral ecology to produce a cohesive metric of individual difference. For those who can recall
their linear equations, those that take the form y equals mx plus b, I will give it in that format
first and here friends I do have to apologize obviously in the actual text you know like I
have a visual representation of this which does make it a little bit easier and you don't
actually need to know you don't have to remember your linear equations but I'll give it in that
format first. y equals the continuous behavioral response to an environmental input x equals the
continuous environmental input right so you know y is the behavioral response x is the
environmental condition that we're behaving in response to okay so m is behavioral plasticity
and b is individual personality or the stable differences between individuals so each individual
possesses their own reaction continuum so each individual is represented by a unique line on the
graph recall that m is the coefficient of slope and a linear equation so in our case it means that
the more an individual's behavior varies with the changing intensity of an environmental condition
the more their behavior is plastic and b is the intercept where you start on the graph so that
is the variation between individuals in the behavior at environmental inputs of the same intensity
and one can imagine another horizontal line somewhere above the x-axis which is our threshold
where if the environmental input is sufficiently intense and reaction continua are sufficiently
plastic a new behavior emerges one could imagine for instance the transition between noticing a
threat and responding with an aggressive display and then add another threshold further along
for transitioning from an aggressive display to outright aggression let's exit our graph and make
this notion concrete with an example september 11th 2001 induced a profound right-wing shift in
the political perceptions of the american public or in any case a significant proportion thereof
in a number of cases it was clear that a threshold had been crossed for the emergence
of behavioral responses that we otherwise might not have known people possessed the latent
capacity for individuals who had never argued in favor of international aggression
suddenly sounded very much like their erstwhile political opponents so our behavioral response
norm or reaction continuum we will call the mobilization of intergroup threat psychology
in the evolved behavioral paradigm of intergroup aggression our environmental input is planes
crashing into the world trade center towers repeatedly on every television screen in america
for months personality the stable differences between people subject to the same environmental
input is represented by the fact that there was a wide range of perceptions of the threat of
terrorism and the need for aggressive response in the us before 9-11 and plasticity is how
we measure the change in that perception when 9-11 happened for instance i lacked this form
of intergroup threat psychology both before and after 9-11 so in terms of my personality
i exhibited a low behavioral response but also relatively little plasticity donald rumsfeld exhibited
a high behavioral response hardly needing 9-11 to want to invade iraq and thus also relatively
low plasticity and in between us was let us say a liberal opinion columnist of the new york
times who would have found rumsfeld's penchant for war appalling before 9-11 but after which
who wrote an op-ed soberly reporting that everything had changed this individual exhibited a low
behavioral response in terms of personality but significant plasticity crossing the threshold
into supporting various misadventures of international aggression when subject to a
sufficient environmental input so we have surveyed some of the major evolutionary themes
associated with individual difference the lack of a clear optimum for many individually varying
traits the relationship between personality and life history phases and development
individual difference as reaction continue expressing a portion of the arc of possible
behaviors and perceptions while other portions of this arc remain latent within any given
individual the notion that a significant proportion of individual variation may be
incidental to the processes of trait construction this last theme directs us to our second level
of explanation the actual properties of organisms and the means by which they are generated
proximate mechanisms of trait construction of what biologically does individual variation
consist certainly the answer to this is partially differences in nuclear dna sequences
or single nucleotide polymorphisms or SNPs the variations in single nucleotide bases of DNA
caused by variable transcription of the genetic code however it is important to note a very wide
disparity between heritability estimates for a given trait and the proportion of that heritability
that can actually be attributed to SNPs this is important because how traits are actually
constructed has a great deal of salience to the culture wars that often occur with regard to
biological explanations and the fundamental values those culture wars reflect understanding the
mechanisms of trait construction presents us with a biology that is more rapidly adaptive
and fundamentally plastic than the simplified abstract thinking of randomly infrequently
mutating genes for behaviors would imply a psychological resistance to the fixity associated
with this style of evolutionary thinking has a great deal to do with leftist and liberal resistance
to biological reasoning let us take schizophrenia as an example heritability studies estimate a
genetic contribution to the variability of this trait that is more than three orders of
magnitude greater than can be accounted for by SNPs in genome wide association studies
the means by which the heritability of a trait is estimated is through studies of genetically
identical twins raised apart which is to say it is based on observation of the difference
between genetically identical and genetically different people in terms of observable behavior
such studies make no inquiries into the basis of heritability in addition to SNPs only
contributing a very small proportion of the genetic variability of a trait determined by twin
studies all traits of interest are polygenic affected by multiple genes and associated with
many genetic variants which is to say different sets of multiple genes affect the trait in
different individuals this is sometimes called the fourth law of behavioral genetics the first
three by the way are that all human traits of interest have a genetic component the genetic
component is stronger than the family component and that the variability of no trait is entirely
accounted for by the genetic and familial variation if SNPs are not the fundamental
basis of a huge proportion of observed genetic variability this essentially leaves although
this is a very broad statement with many different specific meanings variation in gene expression
variable gene expression in different parts of the body and at different times
is how development occurs all cells of complex multi-celled organisms contain the same nuclear
DNA sequence with the exception of reproductive cells and so the functional difference between
teeth and heart and nervous system cells is in variable gene expression regimes between them
this process begins at the very outset of embryogenesis with variable gene expression
profiles in the very early organism comprising a coordinate system denoting ventral endorsal
anterior and posterior with refinements coming in successive stages of cell division to indicate
increasingly acute geographic parameters which eventually translate into specific anatomical
features development is the source of difference at different points throughout the lifespan of
the individual and the source of much of the evolutionary difference between species so it
isn't surprising if it is also the language of individual difference within a species let's
make a concrete example of these levels of difference inter species inter individual and
intra individual in developmental terms by examining the biology of diminished aggression
which is sometimes called for better or for worse the domestication syndrome this biology
will remain with us through the remainder of the book so it is worth establishing some fundamentals
and reasonably great detail the ultimate evolutionary causes of diminished aggression
can be numerous in bonobos for instance it is thought that ecological changes experienced
by an ancestor with more chimpanzee-like behavior produced a social structure that
increased the liabilities and decreased the benefits of male aggression the evolutionary
pressure for domestication is selection by humans of less aggressive animals a syndrome
of correlated trait variations associated with diminished aggression regardless of the ultimate
cause from bonobos to cattle suggesting a shared biology delayed development across a
wide range of traits from anatomy to play to duration of maternal dependence an increase in
prosociality and social tolerance an increased behavioral flexibility thought to be a function
of the prolongation of the critical period of development decreased anatomical and size differences
between the sexes as well as decreased behavioral difference an increase in the number of reproductive
phases as well as the range and frequency of sexual behavior species typical levels of aggression
can be rapidly radically and adaptively shifted in either direction depending on environmental inputs
in the famous farm fox experiment begun by Russian geneticist Dmitry Believ in the 1960s for instance
it required only three generations of selective breeding for individuals to be born that did
not exhibit a species typical fear response to humans and another three generations for
animals to be born which the researchers called the domestication elite whose behavior is quote
similar to that of the domestic dog they do not escape humans but actively seek contact with them
seeing a human even at a distance they whine yelp and wag their tail anticipating a contact
during the contact they try to lick the experimenters face and hands and quote these
foxes exhibited the correlated traits of the domestication syndrome with a prolongation
or lifelong retention of juvenile morphology and behavior including of the flexible exploratory
critical period in expanded window of sexual activity and an increase in social tolerance of
one another in addition to their increased friendliness towards humans diminished aggression was
the sole criterion of selection in the experiment the other traits emerged because
their development shares a regulatory pathway with aggression or because they are mediated
by mechanisms in common with aggression the beginning of this broad developmental regulatory
pathway is invariable patterns of gene expression during embryogenesis genes high up in the regulatory
hierarchy produce proteins which bind to sections of dna upstream from the coding region of genes
the degree to which a gene is expressed at a given time is a function of summing the inputs
from multiple proteins which is to say the product of multiple regulatory genes at these upstream
sites called switches so in other words dna has regions that code for protein and upstream regions
that take these like proteins that are bound to them and sum the inputs to decide whether or not
and to what extent to code for a protein evolution resulting from developmental changes as in the
case of our farm foxes in their progression from wild to domestic animals is called aptly enough
evolutionary developmental biology or evo-devo quoting from carols endless forms most beautiful
the first shots in the evo-devo revolution revealed that despite their great differences
in appearance and physiology all complex animals flies and fly catchers dinosaurs and trilobites
butterflies and zebras and humans share a common toolkit of master genes that govern the formation
and patterning of their bodies and body parts diversity is not so much a matter of the complement
of genes in an animal's toolkit but in the words of eric clapton it's the way you use it the
development of form depends on the turning on and off of genes at different times and places
in the course of development end quote this type of wholesale reorganization of an organism
structure based on gene expression changes rather than random mutations of nuclear dna sequences
is likely a primary source of difference between humans and our close relatives for instance
brain differences between chimpanzees and humans are considerably greater in terms of
gene transcription profiles than they are in terms of polymorphisms of nuclear dna and
this is particularly the case with respect to genes associated with brain growth and development
providing a strong indication about the mechanism of humanity's unique brain size and structure
as well as an explanation of our uniquely long period of maturation
greater than that of any other mammal and our juvenile features with respect to other primates
evo-devo describes evolutionary change that is more rapidly and radically adaptive
than what we can expect to see if we must wait for nuclear dna to randomly mutate in a fortuitous manner
based as it is on phenotypic and behavioral plasticity crucially for understanding the
socio-political implications of evolutionary theory it describes populations of organisms
that contain the latent potential for a considerably greater range of behaviors
and for that matter anatomies then is expressed at any given time as mary west eberhardt
one of the pioneers of the science phrased it the origin of new direction of adaptive evolution
starts with a population of variably responsive developmentally plastic organisms that is before
the advent of a novel trait there is a population of individuals that are already variable
and differentially responsive or capable of producing phenotypic variants under the influence
of new inputs from the genome and the environment variability and responsiveness is due partly
to genetic variation and partly to variations in the developmental plasticity of phenotype
structure physiology and behavior that arise during development and may be influenced by
environmental factors including maternal effects that reflect genetic and environmental variation
present in previous generations end quote the strongest hypothesis of exactly what developmental
pathway the correlated traits of reduced aggression share concerns the neural crest during embryogenesis
three germ layers form the ectoderm mesoderm and endoderm to eventually produce structures
at various depths the neural crest sitting on top of the developing neural tube which will
eventually become a spinal cord diversifies into so many structures such as nerve cells
pigment producing melanocytes and adrenal glands that it is sometimes been called the fourth germ
layer reduced aggression is thought to be a function of reduced size and function of
the adrenal glands which play a central role in the physiology of both fear and stress
responses this reduction of the adrenal glands is in turn hypothesized to result from diminished
neural crest cell production in this scenario the multiple genes shared by animals exhibiting
the domestication syndrome which appear to be under selective pressure and are therefore likely
to be involved in producing the correlated traits of the syndrome would have a regulatory effect
on the expression of genes involved in producing the neural crest or in mediating the migration
and diversification of neural crest cells into their descendant structures this level of detail is
substantial but still encompasses many distinct possibilities for instance domestic animals
have reduced brain size which could be predicted by the fact that the neural crest produces
nervous tissue however humans have greatly enlarged brains from prolongation of brain growth
via the same developmental pathway obviously a range of mechanisms at finer resolutions remains
unexplored in this description broadly speaking however the mechanism of polygenic changes to
the neural crest in its descendant systems allows us to understand and formulate hypotheses
about this syndrome of correlated traits it allows us to see constraints on what traits emerge and
understand the correlations between them for instance the fact that the neural crest generates
pigment producing melanocytes helps us understand why domestic animals have patches of depigmented
hair a pattern called piebald in conjunction with their reduced aggression we can now relate
this developmental framework to various measures of individual difference this is certainly not
to say that this correlated trait syndrome is the only source of individual difference although it
certainly seems like a substantial contributor but the specific developmental pathway we have
examined is a helpful window into the processes of trait construction more generally one potentially
fruitful way to biologically describe the measures of individual difference found in fields like
psychology and behavioral ecology where observable behavior and in the case of human self report
are the terms in which differences are described is by the activity of neurotransmitters the measures
vary somewhat from the five factor model already explored but one system for relating temperament
to neurotransmitter regime is the fissure temperament inventory it consists of four rather
than five broad dimensions of temperament each associated with a neurotransmitter curious energetic
associated with dopamine cautious social norm compliant associated with serotonin analytical
tough minded associated with testosterone and pro-social empathetic associated with oxytocin
and estrogen different brain regions contain different concentrations of receptors for various
neurotransmitters and the construction of brain regions is mediated by neurotransmitters providing
a causal link between the activity of brain regions specialized for certain behaviors and
perceptions producing certain temperaments and specific neurotransmitters with this system
responses to questionnaire items can be statistically related to patterns of brain
activity high scores on the curious energetic dimension of the fissure temperament inventory
for instance have been correlated with increased activity of the substantia nigra where dopamine
activity is particularly pronounced this dimension appears to map fairly directly to the
extroversion component of the five factor model while extroversion often has an exclusively
social connotation in common use it refers to a generally exploratory and self-asserting
nature for instance high extroversion predicts a greater number of emergency room visits not
because extroverts tend to socially impose themselves until someone reacts aggressively but
because of a general relationship with the environment extroversion entails cross species
comparisons converge on this meaning a dimension of squirrel behavior called exploration for
instance with high explorers building nests and more risky locations is related to extroversion
we can see a similar durability across context with the fissure temperament inventory's
cautious social norm compliant dimension which they correlate with activation of regions of
the ventral lateral prefrontal cortex associated with social norm compliance in therefore to the
activity of the serotonin system we can relate this to the greater social tolerance exhibited
by domestic animals where their increased friendliness and docility is associated with an increase
in serotonin this temperamental dimension appears to be most strongly related to agreeableness in the
five factor model but potentially also to some of what is captured by openness to the extent that
openness reflects rather than a desire for novelty per se a relaxation of avoidance behaviors and
a greater propensity for approach behavior a function of diminished fear of others openness
is related to sociality social comprehension and empathy as well however with research
finding higher openness correlated with quote more friendliness more expressivity less halting
speech and more smiling end quote so in addition to the cautious social norm compliant dimension of
the fissure temperament inventory openness is almost certainly related to its pro social empathetic
dimension illustrating that behavioral difference can be conceptualized in various ways
as with the developmental paths associated with the neural crest
our purpose in relating individual difference to variation in neurotransmitter regimes
is not to exhaustively explore every conceivable mechanism but to broadly indicate the nature
of these mechanisms anyone who has taken a drug which after all is a substance that crosses the
blood-brain barrier to bind to neurotransmitter receptors and has experienced the profound
dispositional shifts that result can imagine how mechanisms that produce variation in
neurotransmitter regimes could produce stable individual differences we cannot progress to
the next of our explanatory levels and that friends is where we will end for today but
the next of our explanatory levels species typical behavior is going to be i think a
podcast unto itself i've read 22 pages and that section ends at page like 45 or something so
well we'll call that the next episode and because it is already written i mean i'll wait
like a few days to release it but i'm i'm actually just going to keep recording right now
so if you're on the edge of your seat you're going to have to stay there for like 72 hours or
something and then i'll i'll release strongman narcissists and technocrats part two until then
take care and we will talk again soon