Title: Taming the Apocalypse With Dr Shane Simonsen
Episode #: 79
Episode ID: 15517856
Source: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/15517856-taming-the-apocalypse-with-dr-shane-simonsen.mp3
------------------------------------------------------------

=== EPISODE METADATA ===
Generated: 2026-01-12 01:02:05
Episode ID: 11817276
MP3 File: 11817276-glitching-is-the-new-tweaking-excerpt.mp3
Title: Glitching Is the New Tweaking (excerpt)
Podcast/Artist: Against the Internet
Album/Series: Fight Like An Animal
Source URL: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/11817276-glitching-is-the-new-tweaking-excerpt.mp3
========================
Until the first global famine, drugs were following the same broad trends as a lot of other aspects
of the economy, towards greater technological intensification, unnecessary complexity, abstraction,
and ultimately, an increasing quotient of falsehood.
First, there were Oxycontin tablets.
Then, there were pressed pills made of a handful of different fentanyl analogs, a kiss of
meth, and a few other things, which were all dressed up to look like 30mg Oxycontin tablets.
Then, and this is how Glitch First made its appearance, there were these pills that were
seriously counterfeits of the counterfeit oxys.
You needed Badre Leher to figure it out.
And we went along with it as best we could, weed was over, and we were out there trying
to ride the waves and at the same time do right by the people who relied on us.
But it was getting harder and harder.
I mean, it was bad enough when the dope was replaced by the fent, but when Glitch came
around I had to tap out, that was just too dark to watch people go through.
And I started buying my shit on the dark web because it was the only source I could
really rely on to get me at least pure fentanyl.
But that, in addition to being much more expensive, got harder and harder as well.
So we'd already been thinking about a return to fundamentals, an escape from civilization
if you will, when the first global famine hit.
It just gave us the impetus to act.
We grew up running around in the forest guerrilla gardening after all, repelling down cliffs to
plant in locations inaccessible by foot, building latticeworks of twigs over tiny blackberry
choked creeks and putting grow bags on the lattices with wicks transporting the water
up from the creek, burying shipping containers on old logging landings to do subterranean
hydroponic grows.
We were second and third generation with it.
The drugs we'd taken to selling when the weed money dried up, we reminded ourselves, came
from a fucking flower.
And it was a flower that thrived in a variety of conditions, including amidst considerable
adversity.
This year I was getting too hot and dry at lower elevations, but still we had great
success above four to five thousand feet or so.
When we distributed our efforts all over, northward up through Oregon and Washington,
massive dispersal, staggered plantings over large windows of time, and sowing over vastly
greater an area than you realistically expected to harvest.
These were the fundamental requirements of opium farming in the novel climate of the 2020s.
In western North America or really anywhere else.
The tendency toward more temperature extremes and more rapid oscillations between them
even helped the poppies germinate.
If you planted somewhere that didn't freeze, some people like to put them in and out of
the freezer to emulate natural temperature regimes.
It quickly became apparent that we could use essentially the same techniques we developed
in drug cultivation to produce food as the global economy faltered.
The problem with anything that was produced and distributed within the existing centralized
infrastructural networks of the global economy is that this infrastructure became hyper-militarized
in service of concentrating the remaining resources in the possession of a wealthy minority.
Food production had to be dispersed and difficult to scrutinize in order to survive.
That such subsistence modes characterized state-evading peoples throughout history was well-established.
Crops suited to what James Scott called escape agriculture were those that ripened quickly,
grew on marginal land and at high altitudes, require little attention, are grown in
dispersed fashion, can be stored for long periods, and which must be dug up individually
and can be left in the ground after maturing, as is the case with roots and tubers.
There had always been obvious parallels between the drug-cultivating mountain culture from
which we derived and the mountain peoples who always seemed to exist at the periphery
of every empire.
Now, these parallels grew.
In addition to opium poppies, we began growing potatoes and clear cuts, legumes
and the scars of the growing megafires.