Title: Tree Worship Revival
Episode #: 85
Episode ID: 16713340
Source: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/16713340-tree-worship-revival.mp3
------------------------------------------------------------

=== EPISODE METADATA ===
Generated: 2026-01-12 01:02:05
Episode ID: 10406492
MP3 File: 10406492-what-is-politics-interview-with-daniel-pt-2.mp3
Title: What Is Politics? Interview with Daniel pt. 2
Podcast/Artist: Against the Internet
Album/Series: Fight Like An Animal
Source URL: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/10406492-what-is-politics-interview-with-daniel-pt-2.mp3
========================
What is the highest technique you want to achieve?
You have no technique.
Very good.
What are your thoughts when facing the point?
They don't.
They don't.
I really don't remember exactly where we were.
Do you?
The last thing, yes, I wrote it down.
You were talking about the great David Graven Wangra's new inconsequentialism paradigm.
Consequentialism, right.
I was going to say that what's really interesting.
First of all, when it comes to materialism, that super stages of history,
they got foragers or egalitarian, horticultures like this,
agriculture like that, that's kind of dead by the 90s that's dead.
But you still do have what you were talking about is when it comes to civilization,
everybody's like, oh, yeah, yeah, but today,
no one's going to say, oh, hunting and gathering equals this or horticulture equals that.
Because we know that that's not true.
We know all kinds of different hunter-gatherers who do different things
and have different social structures.
But when it comes to civilization, everybody's like, oh, yeah, well, civilization is just too complicated.
Exactly.
You got, you got, it's too big.
So that's there.
But when you're saying Graver's new paradigm,
it's funny because he is rare in that mostly when people are trying to hide not having well-developed ideas,
they're writing really intense jargon and being impossible to understand.
Yeah.
Like, like I was reading this Foucault book, like when I was in doing my grad degree,
and I was like, I understand English.
How come I don't understand?
And like, I understand every sentence, but I don't understand what's happening.
Like, why don't I understand?
Why do I feel so stupid?
Then I get, it's this book called Power and Sexuality, I think.
Then I get to page 281.
And then all of a sudden he defines what power,
what he means by power and what he means by sexuality.
And they were totally off the wall idiosyncratic definitions.
So I wasted, I didn't understand what was going on because he was using these words totally irregularly,
which is fine, but at least let me know.
He only tells you in page 280.
So you have to reread the whole fucking book and then you are like, okay, I understand it.
But Graver was a guy who could have no, not really know what he was talking about
or be sure what he was talking about.
And then right in pure plain English, that's super easy to understand.
And somehow managed to hide the fact that he doesn't, he's not talked,
he doesn't have a fully formed idea.
And it's like, that's a good talent.
Like the guy I tell in the, in the chapter I was reading, I'm reading now the,
the unfreezing the Ice Age or that I'm critiquing now.
I don't know if you noticed this, but so they're talking about hunter gathers in the Ice Age.
And he's talking about gobleck.
He's pretending that hunt, like, oh, well, hunter, hunter gathers built goblecky tepe,
which actually isn't in the Ice Age at all.
It's totally in the Holocene.
So it has nothing to do with human origins.
And then also the Northern Paleolithic Europe is 2200,000 years,
250,000 years after a human being started.
And it's also in the most extreme environment on earth.
So it has nothing to do with what we were like when we started.
So that's one thing, but then they're talking about this and that.
And then if you read it carefully and you're paying attention,
because he's trying to give you the idea that he says like inequality has no origins.
See, but nothing he said actually leads you to that.
Like it's a total non sequitur.
Like he had no art.
Like there's literally no argument for why, why there was in a,
like he doesn't actually say there was inequality.
First of all, he just makes you think it looks like inequality because
he's talking about all these things.
But then he actually says, but there probably wasn't inequality because blah,
blah, blah.
Inequality has no origin.
And you, and it's so exciting that you don't notice that this actually
literally makes no sense.
And it's total non sequitur.
Like there are only arguments in that section for why,
and there are good arguments for why there might have been inequality in
the Paleolithic.
They just don't touch them because they're all materialist arguments.
So like when you see these arguments going back and forth,
it's all materialist arguments.
But anyways, but they're actually the one place where they actually
give a reason why they say that there was inequality has no origin.
It's craniometry.
They're basically saying, well,
at that time you had homo heidelbergensis and,
and homo Neredi and all these different people.
And they're all different shapes and sizes.
And they lived in a bunch of different environments.
So clearly their social structures must have been very different from
each other.
That's it.
That's the one place where they give an argument.
And I was like, what am I, what is this?
Like, holy shit.
Wow.
Well, I feel like,
I mean, I feel like if you were an alien observer,
you could read that book and I'm not sure if you would even know
that humanity evolved in Africa.
Like it's like, it's like that level.
That's right.
That's right.
I'm mentioning that in the critique.
Yeah, there's no, there's no Africa.
Like we're involving completely different conditions that has
nothing to do with the Paleolithic.
It's like, I compared it to it's like talking about trying
to analyze what's happening in ancient Rome by talking about
what the Inuit foragers are doing in the 19th century.
Like, oh, those ancient Romans, they ate a lot of whale blubber.
Like, what are you talking about?
Like it's interesting.
That has nothing to do with anything.
And I also discovered, I don't know if it's relevant,
like you don't have to keep it in, but they made shit up.
Like in their 2015 article, they say that the Nambuquara had
more authoritarianism in the gardening season than in the
hunting season.
But in their 2020 book, they say the opposite.
And then I was like, Oh, what's that?
Or did I miss read it the first time?
And then I read the other article.
I'm like, well, maybe I miss misinterpreted it.
And then I went and read Levy Strauss.
And then Levy Strauss doesn't say anything about the,
the Nambuquara having more authority in one season than the
other at all.
There's nothing in there.
And I'm like, whoa, whoa.
Okay.
Well, maybe they read a different Levy Strauss.
We just forgot to cite it.
So I went and read.
He has like three other books where he talks about that.
Nothing.
And I tried looking at other Nambuquara stuff.
And then I found out by reading other authors about the Nambuquara
that Levy Strauss was actually wrong himself and that they
didn't even have to two modes of subsistence.
Like the whole story is that they do foraging in seven months
out of the year and they do gardening in five months out
of the year.
But that's not even true.
It's just not true.
No.
So the whole, I spent weeks on writing this shit and I
realized none of it's true.
It's all garbage.
And I was trying to come up with materials explanations for
what's happening.
All of this is just garbage.
It's nonsense.
And they keep putting words in the scholar's mouths.
Like what were they?
Oh, like there's a part with, they're talking about the
Inuit and the book that Marcel Maus wrote about them in 1904.
And they're like, Maus said that at most 40% of what was
happening could be attributed to material conditions.
And I was like, oh, that's a pretty specific number.
Where did they get that?
And so I'm like, did he do a quantitative study or did he
just give like a guesstimate?
So I'm reading Maus doesn't say anything.
There's no 40% about nothing.
He doesn't say that.
And actually he says the opposite.
He says everything about the Inuits, different rituals and
different seasons can be attributed to their economic
activity, except for one little thing.
Like why do they live in multifamily eagles instead of
living in separate houses?
Like that's it.
He's like, that's their cultural preference,
but everything else is like material.
So they like, I don't know.
This book is making me nuts.
I've been reading it since August and I'm losing my mind.
It just has that feel.
I mean, and like, I feel like even if you didn't know
anything about the subject, like it's a 700 page book.
And there's this way where it kind of starts and it's got
like momentum, you know, and you're like, yeah,
okay, where are we going here?
And then, you know, those last like couple hundred pages
just feel like this diffusion of intellectual
energy until like the vast chaos of everything they've
encountered.
And then like when I was trying to go through it and do
a series addressing some of the same stuff,
I experienced at the end this kind of similar,
like I just felt like I was kind of spinning out,
you know, this sort of like intellectual exhaustion
kind of thing.
You've been really, you've like really focused on the
the role of like population density and the ability
to just get away from a social situation as like
pretty central.
So the way, I mean, not necessarily population density,
but okay, so there's all factors that materials
anthropologists have been pointing to.
And by the way, today.
Oh, anyway, there's a lot of factors that materials
anthropologists have been pointing to or material
factors that anthropologists have been pointing to
for why hierarchy happens.
And nobody's satisfied with any of these things.
And it's not because they're David Graber is trying
and when we're trying to say that it's because it's
wrong, but I'm saying it's not because it's wrong,
it's because it's incomplete.
So things like population density, things like
agriculture, things like surplus storage, things
like I forget now, but it's all the stuff that
we, you know, typical stuff like this stuff
causes hierarchy.
And as Graber and Wenger actually point out,
I'm going to do something right in the book.
Look, there were agricultural settlements that lasted,
you know, 1,000 years and that there's no hierarchy
or there's only male domination because that's
hierarchy that counts.
But, you know, beyond that, there's not like a social
stratification.
And then you have hunter-gatherers who do have
hierarchy and there's there's societies with
with storage, you know, some of those cities.
I don't know that anthropology as well.
So I can't critique it, but you know,
like the Pacific Northwest Coast foragers,
they started their fishing economy.
The other hierarchical foragers that we know are
Fisher.
They have fishing-based economies.
So you have like the Kalu Sun, Southern Florida,
the Pacific Northwest Coast, people that I knew
in Northern Japan.
So there's something about fishing economy that
ends up generating hierarchy.
But, which David Graber would tell us, well,
they didn't have hierarchy for 800 years.
They were doing fishing.
So it's obviously not the fishing.
No, but it's the combination of factors.
So what I've boiled it down to and maybe
you think it's very arrogant, but it's me
just reading all the scholars and make
systematizing what they're all saying.
And it's in order to get any kind of hierarchy,
you need one group of people, you need a certain
set of conditions which allows one group of
people to dominate resources that other
people need in order to survive or that
other people need period.
And there needs to be no better alternative
to those resources than subjecting yourself
to the authority of that person.
Right?
So that's why you have a job because your boss
has salary that you need to eat.
And it's preferable for most people to go to
that job than to whatever else you're going
to have to do, spare changing on the street
or whatever, you know, other, you know,
starting your own business.
If you have money, if you don't have
money, well, that's not an option.
You know, there's all kinds of,
it's selling drugs, sex work, right?
So that's why you have that hierarchy.
That's why you have any hierarchy.
So anytime you see a hierarchy.
What I'm getting at with this book critique
is that if you want to answer Graeber
and Wengro's question, how did we get
stuck in hierarchy?
Number one, you have to ask what are the
conditions that allow some people to
dominate resources that other people need
and that don't allow them to have
preferable alternatives?
And then if you want to change that
hierarchy, you have to ask, well,
how can we change those conditions to
take away those advantages from the
people who control those resources?
And so if you analyze societies with
those questions in mind, that'll sort
of unlock the mystery of the
relationship between subsistence
activity, surplus population density
and hierarchy.
So in the Pacific Northwest Coast,
you have those cultures started doing
their salmon economy about 800 years
before they started showing signs of
hierarchy in the archaeological record.
Why is that?
It's probably because before
800, before that time, people
probably had other places to go.
They didn't have to be dominated.
If someone is trying to bully you or
dominate you, you could just go hunting
and gather, just do something else.
And if you have that option to go somewhere
else, the person, so salmon
territories lend themselves to
hierarchy because some
territories are better than others,
right? So if your family and your clan
got to one, the best fishing
ground, you're going to have, you're
going to be the richest people, right?
As long as you can keep defending that
territory, then there's going to be
other people who got a worse fishing
ground and that's sort of like where
this potlatch redistribution economy
comes from because the richest clan
head by the chief is redistributing
stuff to the other clans.
But anyways, the more options
you have to go somewhere else,
the higher ups
are going to want to be nice to you
and share with you, right?
To keep you there.
So it's like if you have a job and
there's a labor shortage, well
you can go to 20 other jobs, so your boss
has to be nice to you. If you show up to work late,
he's not going to say anything because
if he loses you, it's going to be really hard to replace you.
So what
happens is that eventually
the areas start to fill up
around the settlements,
whereas now if you try to leave
and find an alternative to the salmon,
you're going to get killed by somebody.
There's no place for you to live or
if the animal resources have been depleted
so you can't really live from hunting and gathering
in that area anymore, etc, etc.
So the relationship
is that first
you have a territory that's fixed
sedentism. That's one of the factors that people
also point to sedentism.
And then you have a surplus.
The surplus allows you to
hire people to defend you,
for example,
to trade and get weapons
to bribe people to pay them.
It gives you all this power,
but you also need for there to be
no better alternative.
And that cements itself
once the surrounding areas start to get
filled up. So there's population density,
surplus, sedentism,
territories, sedentism means
you're depending on a fixed territory
to survive. So all those things
together kind of cement hierarchy.
If you just have one or two,
you probably still have some other alternatives.
And I actually figured this out
in part by reading the Graeber and Wengro book
because they point to
these three fundamental freedoms.
The freedom to disobey, the freedom
to leave, and the freedom
to decide your own
social structure. Now the way they
talk about it is half-baked. They sort of think
about it as, oh well, we're going to
make our society and we're going to have
these three freedoms and that's how it works.
No, it's the material conditions that give you
those freedoms or not. The freedom to leave
is because there's nobody in the surrounding area
or there's not enough people in the surrounding area
that you can actually go. In the book,
he talks about like James C. Scott's escape crops,
that certain people to escape the
domination of civilizations
switch from whatever they were doing
to farming certain kinds of crops
that you can just pack up and leave
and go plant them somewhere else.
So that's what sort of made me realize
that societies could be egalitarian because
they can always go somewhere else.
There's no means to dominate them.
But once there's nowhere to go,
then domination sets in
and cements itself.
Yeah, it does seem like
all that
accords really well.
I mean that's one of my strong senses
like one of the big variables
and yeah, it accords really well
with a lot of James Scott's research
where he's
documenting a lot of
stateless societies
that have agriculture,
but it's specifically like
dispersed mobile agriculture
which allows
and
I
Oh, go ahead.
Just that in those societies, because we always forget about
women, we erase women
from all these discussions, because at the end of the day
a lot of these
egalitarian societies are still male
dominated. They're not egalitarian societies.
That's why we drive me nuts whenever David Graber talked
about an egalitarian society and say see even
the most egalitarian societies has this or that
well, they're not egalitarian, men dominate women.
That's not an egalitarian society.
There actually are several societies where men don't
dominate women and
so even
so just the agriculture itself
will generally tend to give men
advantages, not always because then you could have
certain circumstances lend themselves towards
matrilineal descent and matri
local organization which gives women
more rights, but that's the whole other story
like hierarchy
really does and at the beginning of the
book or when they started writing in 2015
you really had the sense that they were going to touch on
all these subjects. They said
at the beginning of that essay or the end of that essay
we say and we're going to talk about how
forms of domination
actually begin in the home at the most
intimate level and you know as much as
the stuff they're saying about Hunter Gathers was pissing me off
I was like, oh, that's good. Yes, that's right.
They're going to start talking about patch local residents
and how men came to dominate women
and they're going to talk about, they also
were talking about the intellectual left and it looked
like they're going to try to equate
certain strands of Marxism
with intellectual elitism and
I thought this was going to go somewhere interesting
but
I think
it's just because they were
barking up the wrong tree. They
were stuck on this consciousness thing and they didn't want
to look at material conditions and it's just
a dead end. If you don't
understand the context
in which choices are being made
you can't understand anything so they
because they're so determined to
ignore material conditions which they kind of talk about
in chapter five like we're going to focus on
we understand that men doesn't make choices
in a vacuum he makes them according
to the conditions like what Marx said
but we're going to focus on freedom and choice.
Well, sorry buddy because you're just focusing
on freedom and choice outside of the context
of the conditions that those choices are made in
you just fucked yourself you can't answer
your own questions and now your book is a big mess
and I guess he died
before
I don't know if him dying had
an effect on the book or not
supposedly it was finished before he died but maybe
they could have revised them or I don't know
but yeah I know
it is it's really
interesting that choice
where they go into like
really like relatively
little ethnographic detail about
societies that they're trying to describe
as egalitarian
but they don't
yeah in those cases they really
tend to
to ignore
gender
differentials
and therefore to not like they just literally
don't talk about the societies
that show the most
like actual egalitarianism
along every dimension including gender
and and that part just
does make the whole thing feel
it's like pretty
yeah well you want to understand
like wait a second there's gender
equal societies there's societies where women
do hunting even like
how why how come but it's
to ask those questions is to look
at the material conditions because you can't escape
that any discussion
of gender equality always
talks about the conditions and any and
that's what's crazy about this book is
they're talking about like male domination
at a certain point they start talking about it
and male domination I mean there's different
causes of it but there's one
super easy to understand cause that's like
classic that's been in
ethnographies for like decades
maybe a hundred years even and that's
patrilocal residence
and without explaining
what that is right now the point is
it's so classic it's so simple it's so easy to
explain and understand but they don't want to go there
because that's a condition right and they don't
want any kind of determinism so
they act like it's a big mystery
and they're like scientists are just
starting to understand just beginning
to understand what might cause
male domination and I'm like what are you
talking about this is like
you can read about in like the 20s you know
and you can ask any Chinese peasant
you know why are women like you know why does
everyone abort their women and treat their women like
shit and they'll tell you right it's like
these economic reasons that are so easy to
understand and then they're
they're like well maybe it was in Sumerian
temples blah blah blah you know and I'm like
Sumerian temples why do Australian
foragers who live 40,000
like whatever 4000 miles away from the nearest
temple of any kind why do they
have male domination like this is shit
why don't
and it's there it's not like
you know it's not their area of expertise but just
go ask somebody do seriously
yeah
yeah and another
another factor
that seems really like
maybe somewhat under
examined in the literature
I don't know it feels like
as much as that book is pretty crazy
it has been this fun phase
where there's like a public conversation about
this stuff that's very vital
and so like everybody gets to do their
little like piece of homework about it or
whatever and like one of the things
that came up for me as I was assessing
this was
that I really
seems like another condition that you
wouldn't ever be able to like
infer from the archaeological
record or anything is
is this question of
just like the degree
of hostility
and threat of violence from
other groups right yeah
and like the sense that in the degree
of intergroup threat the perception
of that would be highly
predictive of how hierarchical
a society would be
because like there's that you know it's
like even if there's even if you could
otherwise walk away
and go mind your own business and do something
else right if
you can't because there's somebody
who perceives you as an enemy
you know then
like that is
typically like a cross
species in human societies
like is a consolidation
of hierarchy
sort of thing happens as a result
so that's a really great point
and it's also you know like anything
it's a little bit complicated
because you have societies that have a lot of
conflict but that have a lot of
egalitarianism too but it's always male
egalitarianism women
are always okay I'll explain to you
so I guess I'll talk about the patch of local residents
but there's also the fact is that
hierarchy for military
breeds efficiency so
ah oh god where do I
start with this okay so the
the new air who live in southern Sudan
is pastoralist people are a male
egalitarian nomadic pastoralist
culture they
follow their herds of animals and their
wealth is their herds of animals
and they basically don't have much
political hierarchy besides men
dominate women you have a little bit of
Jaren Tarkas too and their social
structure kind of is at largest
at the tribal level but
each tribe is still made up of all these
equals and the tribes
kind of have like you know that
saying it's like a bed when saying
me against my brother
me and my brother against my cousin
me my brother and my cousin against the outside
right like that's
what these societies that's how
they operate like that's their political structure
is your cousin is trying to steal
your cattle you try to steal your cousin's
cattle but if someone tries to steal your cousin's cattle
you join up with your cousin to form a larger group
to fight off that person and
but they're kind of stuck at the tribal level
they can't get any bigger than that so they develop
this institution which is
profits and you'll take
somebody who's kind of a weird
crazy person who doesn't really fit into society
and doesn't have the same social networks
that everybody else has
and you elevate them to the
status of this profit and follow them
and it allows you to create
a superstructure and unite all the
tribes in a great war and so these
profits started emerging when the colonial
powers started attacking them in the 19th
century so
it allowed them to create a more hierarchical
society than what's capable of
and the reason that these crazy people
were chosen probably
was because if you took a normal
person that would give
that would disrupt the whole egalitarian balance
of the society right but
a crazy person doesn't have the same social connections
and tribal connections in the same way
so he's okay he doesn't disrupt the balance as much
and again you had the same thing happen
in the bible in the early
Old Testament where the Israelites
followed these prophets
Evans Pritchard who studied
the new era sort of recognized that
oh it was the same situation where they had to unite
the tribes to fight these wars and the
profits were this institution so it's amazing
like 5,000 years apart
Africa I mean okay Sudan is kind
of close to the Middle East but
you know these completely you know black dark black people
versus like you know Israel like whatever
Israelites they had the same
institutions 5,000 years
apart because of similar conditions
and so that
the outsiders
colonialists trying to attack them
is what sort of incited them to
have this prophetic system and
it also incited
monotheism right
monotheism helped unite the tribes
who had separate identities and separate like
you know symbols that they would
identify with well now you have
this monotheistic God who unites the tribes
and that was what was going on in the Israelites as well
like the new era were sort of developing monotheism
you know as well for similar reasons
now
war
societies who are under attack
always
end up who come under frequent attack
almost always end up being male dominated
because of partial local residents
what you have is
in order to not have inbreeding
you can't just everybody can't just stay
where they are and just marry the people that you grew up
with because you end up marrying your cousin your cousin your cousin
you know it gets really inbred so
especially if you're a sedentary society
either men have to go you have to have different
rules for how you leave and
go mix the gene pool up so
classic ones are like men go somewhere else or women
go somewhere else and the men stay or
the men go somewhere else women stay
or everybody goes off to a different place so
when you're under attack the
common thing is that in every pastoral
society nomadic pastoral society is organized
its way you choose
partial local residents which is
men stay in one place and women go somewhere else
and what that means and the reason you do that
is because all the
all the people in your area
where you grow up they're all your buddies
you've all grown up together and so you form
a good fighting force and you all have the same
economic interests because you're all
owning the same you know group
of cattle so you have
the incentives to stay together and men are
15% you know bigger
and generally stronger than women
so that makes sense
for self-defense but what it has
is also the consequence of
men end up dominating women
why because
every man grew up
with everyone in a given area is all a bunch of guys
who grew up together and all a bunch of
women from different areas
imported in from marriage so any
woman in the area has
no friends or has friends
but like people she doesn't know that
well and the only people she knows really
are other women like oh maybe
she grew up with that woman in her
area but not the seven other
women you know all the guys
know each other and the woman has no
male relatives at all
in the village or the band
or whatever it is so anytime there's a conflict
between a man and a woman
the dude has all his buddies to go back
them up the woman has nobody to back
her up maybe another woman or two
so men are always going to win the
conflict and over time
what I think the reason hierarchy
happens culture's hierarchy
of course and the quality are not just
facts on the ground
they're also cultural like you teach
these culture you know you teach these habits
they're inculcated and the reason you
inculcate these values is because
it stabilizes the system
and prevents chaos and people from killing each
other all the time because if you're going to be
a rational actor and you're going to decide
every time well I don't like
what my husband's doing I'm going to
fight back and
if you have that conflict each time eventually
I realize like oh whenever I try to punch
my husband in the face his three brothers come in
and beat me up and
I might as well not fight so you're going to
learn rationally not to fight but
if you have to learn that every time from
zero you're causing a lot of fights and a
lot of chaos and a lot of disruption
and that's going to
make everybody die right it's just society
might collapse if there's that much disruption
so it's better like the whole point
of culture that's another thing that problem
with I have a graver and wigger's thesis is that
we don't have choice but the whole
point of culture often is to make sure we don't
make choices we don't think
we just have feelings and we just obey
our
inculcation and the same thing in the
egalitarian society the idea is you don't
want to test the limits every time you don't
want to have that fight like when chimpanzees
fight like you'll have one big fight
and then they'll just realize like okay this
guy's stronger than me I'm not going to
fight anymore and it's similarly
with human beings except we teach culture
in chaos otherwise we're just going to be fighting all the time
and well
women you're going to lose every time anyway so what's the point don't
you know
and one of the good examples
of how culture
thinking is a gate like
the whole point of culture often not always is to
prevent thinking rational thought
is kosher laws so
Marvin Harris the big cultural anthropologist
in the 70s 80s 90s
he figured out that
well you have these kosher laws
in the Middle East among Jews but also Muslims
and there's also some similar laws
in other places and what what are these
places have in common
it's that in those areas
pigs eat the same food
as humans so
if everyone starts raising pigs
which everyone's going to want to do because they're a great source of meat
you're going to create shortages
of human food now
maybe it won't happen in good times but if there's
a drought all of a sudden you have all these
shortages and then you have these classes
of some people with pigs and some people without pigs
and you have famine
you're going to have class or you're going to have all this chaos
so if you let everyone think rationally
they're all going to want to raise pigs
you know even if they know that in the future it might
kill kill them all they're just like yeah but
I need meat now I'm hungry
let me raise some pigs but if you have
this taboo and you make it this horror
that even the thought of raising pigs is going to
you know your neighbors will hate you
everyone won't talk to you that works
better than rational choice
than conscious choice
so anyways
and that whole reality of
patrolocal residents
it is kind of
it kind of illustrates this broader
theme that
people knowing like social connections
tends to militate against
hierarchy and social
disconnection tends to really like allow it
oh of course yeah
which seems like it has
a lot of applications for the modern
world as well as you know
in those in a lot of those
societies right men and women don't
socialize right like
they're very separated and one of the reasons
is going to be because
if you do you're going to be like whoa
this sucks until this person is just as smart
as I am she's you know she's
knows more than I do she is why am I
not listening to her and that's going to
be a threat to the whole system and
all your buddies are going to hate you
and you might not you don't want that either
you want to start to feel like you know if you're a landlord
and you're trying to squeeze money out of your tenant
and you start hanging out with your tenant
realizing they're a great person you're going to feel really guilty
about how you make a living you know
that's going to cause all this cognitive dissonance
so all these systems are just based on not
having any connection with those people
100% holy crap
yeah and then and then
ultimately like I always just get to this
point with this stuff because it's like
there's just other variables like
like you just mentioned this fact that there really
is kind of a military advantage to hierarchy
you know like
or just like in terms of its ability like
egalitarianism
implies deliberative processes
and sometimes in a conflict
you really just can't have a meeting you know
like you know at times yeah stuff like
that you know but it's like
there's this sense in which
there's just actually a huge number
of variables and it's this like fascinating
complex thing
and it's just been like the level
of reductionism like I'll read these
serious accounts you know like these very
serious people who are like
we had no territorial impetus
before agriculture
and then we developed one and I'm like
well why were we uniquely unable
to develop a territorial impetus
you know without
agriculture among all like
species you know
I'll tell you though
I mean that's true
and it's not true see that so there's some
it's more complex
yeah exactly yeah well I'll
tell you what I think you tell me what you think of this
right so the whole mystery
because if you look at these immediate return
foragers right the super hyper
egalitarian ones they all
have really low population
density and they don't
have war they don't fight wars
with people like within their group
they don't fight like this
you know band doesn't fight that band
so they all can sort of the population
is low enough that they can sort of all share the territory
without having to fight over it
um it's hard to know what
you know in the Paleolithic it was different
because now you have like these foragers
just truly surrounded by these other people
so in a world for a forager they might have been
a different dynamic but the Paleolithic
was a time when the climate was changing
really really rapidly so temperatures
were going up and down wildly like within
a generation or two your environment
would be totally different in each area
like the way like we see climate change is like
well that would be happening every
20 to 40 years so you'd be like
totally in this great fishing spot and then 40
years later it becomes like desert certified
and there's no fish there anymore you know and
so what I think and I think this
explains our sort of dual nature where we have
where we fall easily into hierarchy but we also
really love equality
in times when the
environment was becoming
uh more
agreeable for human life like
territories were expanding there's more game
there's more territories there's no reason
to fight so people you don't need
there's no territoriality like that's it
those immediate return hunter-gatherers usually don't have
territoriality they don't defend
territories because they don't need to that there's enough space
for everybody to go do their thing
but in times where
all of a sudden a little ice age is coming
or a little you know a contraction
or everything gets desertified
or whatever it is in a squeeze time
well all of a sudden you do have
conflict and you probably do have territoriality
like Colin Turnbull found that
in the
the booty who
didn't show any territoriality
they still kept these totemic symbols
the men still had these secret totemic
symbols these clan symbols
which represented their territory
but they didn't have territory and other
people have found I think about the
the Kalahari foragers as well
so what I think is that they have these
dormant
patrilineal sort of clan
organizations
that only kick into gear
once you need them
which is once all of a sudden there's that
population pressure and conflict
so I think it makes sense to say
well we didn't have territoriality
because we didn't in certain times
in certain conditions you know what I mean
yeah
and agriculture immediately means territoriality
like the fact is well
we have this territory like this is the farming
territory and we and other people are going to want it
like that's just the fact of life
and that there happens to be a ton of amazing
territory there's just going to eventually
and when you have
agriculture foragers have like
four kids over their lifetime
agriculture has like that survived
agriculture has had like ten
the population just explodes it's totally
different like it really does create land
hunger it does create the impotence for
territoriality it does create very different
conditions it's just not always going to
result in the same things because there's
conditions that are different you know
yeah I mean I do think that
there's like some decent evidence from
other like other regions
of the world like Papua New Guinea
in Australia for
like neighboring hunter-gatherers
having a pretty strongly developed
sense of like
there being like a line you shouldn't
cross without expecting maybe
some conflict you know
because they are
they're resort like Australia
is a big place so it seems
and sparsely populated like if we're just
talking about hunter-gatherer Australia
but it's also a not very productive
place in terms of resources very
desert so
even though they have thin numbers they're actually
in a squeeze and they actually have
territoriality because there's not enough
to go around so they have to defend themselves
and Australian hunter-gathers are the only
immediate return hunter-gathers who have
male domination and it's not a I don't think
that's the coincidence yeah right
I think they look like what
human beings would have looked like in the squeeze times
in the Paleolithic you know whereas
the hadza
or the moody look like what humans
would have looked like in the good times
in the Paleolithic yeah
and so but so that's another that
it's an interesting
once again like you know there's just
like more complexity than tends to be
ascribed to these situations
in traditional accounts because
what you actually have is this weird reality
that both hyperabundance
and scarcity tend to
produce like a more territorial
you know dynamic
and you can so see
you know it's like account after
account that's just like
not gonna get into that level
of like you know
yeah because people can't figure it out
like they're making those mistakes they're saying like
oh well surplus is
what causes hierarchy but then like you were telling me
like well yeah but bonobos have way
more surplus than
chimpanzees but they have way less hierarchy
and it's because of that surplus because there's less
to fight about but then why do we see so much
hierarchy with their surplus well because
the ability to store the hierarchy
the surplus gives you a military
advantage when you have
enough population that there's no you know there's
those factors so we I think
we haven't done a good job
anthropologists were sort of
starting to think these things
through but then postmodernism kind of
everything out and I think
there hasn't been good you know really
you're getting into this so that's what I'm trying to do with this
David Graberkirk is kind of
it's making me realize a lot of this stuff because I'm
reading a lot of this literature
and I feel like I'm seeing this stuff that they sort of missed
maybe that's just the
Dunner Krueger syndrome
of ignorant people thinking they know more
than they do but I think I know a
fair amount at this point but
yeah like yeah the surplus thing is really
interesting because
anyway just what I said yeah
scarcity can cause definitely
hierarchy scarcity can cause equality
surplus can cause equality
surplus can cause hierarchy
because there's other factors it's not just
you can't just say oh winter causes
hierarchy summer causes equality
no there's more going on
even if you'll see some trends like oh a lot
of these cultures seem to be dispersed
in the summer and congregate in the winter
but then other you know
but there are a few who do the opposite
doesn't mean that winter and summer have nothing
to do with what's happening it's just
we have to look at the other conditions
it seems like the best scenario
is dispersed
abundance it seems like
you know right where it's like
there's a lot of resources
to be accessed so there's not
the mechanism of scarcity don't kick in
but there's no way to concentrate
them in one place
for one person to say
it's all mine and I get to control the distribution
that's where I never thought of it
that makes a lot of sense and that because
people are always saying like oh storage
you know that leads to hierarchy
but hunter-gatherers do storage
they just don't need to
do storage it's already stored
fruit is in the trees
why would I take
the fruit out and put it in a box
like that's stupid it's just there I could go get it
right so
if it's dispersed like yeah what you're saying
it's totally right if it's dispersed
people are always moving around
and nobody needs to fight over any particular tree
but if there's only one tree
then a bunch of dudes
are gonna
build a wall around that tree
and take that tree and then you're gonna have chaos
and hierarchy and then they're gonna be
hiring other dudes to go fight off the other dudes
and make the other dudes clean their dishes
or whatever
so
I feel like the last thing
that I was hoping to get into
is a huge topic but
we should at least touch on it is like
you've done all this work
trying to
clarify
historical meanings of left right
useful as opposed to useless
meanings of left right
and like examining
the kind of
incoherence of a lot of the other
terms that are thrown around a lot
or the oppositions like
market versus state
like that you know
which you can barely have a functioning market without the state
it makes no sense
but so you know
I've really been stumbling across this
thing where
I keep being like I don't know
if these terms
we all know the terms are
chaotic and a lot of what you've been
doing is almost like salvaging them
from the chaos and I've been
kind of like
really wondering if it's better
to not use them
you know
and I think that what you've done
of describing politics
in terms of hierarchy and equality
that makes a lot of sense to me
but trying to associate those meetings
with left right considering
A the like totalitarian
associations with leftism
that are so
so impossible to transcend
in so many conversations
and then B the kind of like
dynamic
identitarian connotations
I'm like this is a lot
this is a lot of like
yard to do or whatever
that's true that's a good point
what do you think about all that
so I'm not sure
I don't
I don't care exactly
whatever works you know
I'm interested in results whatever works
so my feeling about it and I have an episode
episode 4 where I talk
about the criteria that I use
and I think people should use
for which definitions should we use for stuff
right like the definition for racism
that was that you'd learned
before 2010 in college
is different than the definition you've learned today
right is that does that help
us achieve like
so clarity consensus consequences
like does it make sense
do people understand what you're saying
like what you're saying like you know that
left and right might fail the clarity test
like left and right are clear
and coherent if I talk about equality
and hierarchy but there's so many baggage
associations that it might take
if I have to explain for 45 minutes what I mean
by racism right
that maybe that's not a really great
you know term so
maybe you're right
I
I'm trying to salvage
the terms like you know I'm
you know to me the authority Stalinism
is a right wing
structure even though Stalin probably
believed that he was really trying to achieve
some kind of egalitarian future doesn't matter
like
we're saying early about the efficiency of hierarchy
I believe I don't think you can make a film
without a hierarchy like I don't think
that's possible and I'm
a left wing person in almost every way but
that's a right wing argument any argument that
justifies hierarchy is a right wing argument
you know so
it's not even necessarily a judgment it's just as long
as you're not exploit it doesn't have to be an exploitation
it can be a democraticarchy but
so I'm trying to salvage these terms
and I'm trying to join left and right to
what I think are their coherent meanings which is
equality and hierarchy but at the end
of the day if that doesn't work
I don't care as long as we stick
to equality and hierarchy because that's what
matters there's a good article
I don't know good article but there's a funny article by this
professor who said we have to ditch the
terms left and right because they don't make any sense
and he's saying what does Stalin have to do
with Hillary Clinton or with
Zelensky like this doesn't make any sense
goes on and on and on and it's about what really
matters is hierarchy versus equality
and I laugh because like that's what
left and right means dumbass
but yeah if it's too
complicated if nobody gets it
like you know the way I'm trying to do it
is I'm saluting it by saying well no
Stalin is actually on the right
but he's disguised
you know as being on the left he thinks
he's on the left a lot of that identity politics
stuff is disguised
as being on the left but it's actually
right-wing it's elite universities
it's rich kids it's corporations
dressing up as feminists
to you know exercise their class
power it's not the same as left-wing
feminism or left-wing anti-racism
maybe that's not going to work maybe that's
too complicated maybe it's too annoying
so maybe there's another way of just
expressing hierarchy versus equality I like
what you've been doing talking about
integration versus separation
but I wouldn't use those terms
you know like the separation
like you're talking about between classes
like if men are dominating women
they're not going to socialize with each other
they're not going to connect together you want to see
all these artificial differences that don't exist
gender categories become very strict
you know like one of the cool things
in those gender egalitarian societies
is they all have genders
but there's no gender policing
like if a woman goes and does men stuff
nobody cares or you know oh that's interesting
that's different but nobody cares
they don't want to go away and live together
nobody feels threatened by it it's like oh that means
there's more meat because there's two hunters
let's go follow those dudes around you know
like that's how they think
so difference doesn't have to equal
hierarchy but
looking at the connected
connectivity between everything versus
the separation of everything is important
and it's deep but I think that that could
be mixed up and
you could pretend
hierarchy often justifies itself
the separation right
like I was saying that whole the body
the head, the hands, the feet
that's the wholeness
that's a wholeness argument so
I really think we need to focus on hierarchy
versus equality I don't care what words we use
as long as it means hierarchy versus equality
that's my thought about it
awesome
I feel like this was a great conversation
and probably we have to stop somewhere
because
we're never going to say the definitive
thing about the dawn of everything because there's
just too much
to say
there's more important stuff to talk about anyways
I can't wait to get that over with
chapter 4 and 5
and then move on to other things in my life
I'm going to go back to doing definitions what is the state
what is the market
what is capitalism
what is the state
what is the market
what is the state
what is the market
what is the state
what is the market