Title: Love to the Fighters
Episode #: 88
Episode ID: 17205513
Source: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/17205513-love-to-the-fighters.mp3
------------------------------------------------------------

=== EPISODE METADATA ===
Generated: 2026-01-12 01:02:05
Episode ID: 10301941
MP3 File: 10301941-what-is-politics-interview-with-daniel-pt-1.mp3
Title: What Is Politics? Interview with Daniel pt. 1
Podcast/Artist: Against the Internet
Album/Series: Fight Like An Animal
Source URL: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/10301941-what-is-politics-interview-with-daniel-pt-1.mp3
========================
What is the highest technique you have no technique very good?
What are your thoughts when facing?
Daniel, what's up? How's it going?
What's up? I'm good. I'm happy to keep doing this finally again finally again. However, you want to think about it
So I think that good logo going on. Oh my god. I know right you're gonna it's like good
It's like you're being skyrocketed into a totally professional media echelon
Never dreamed you'd be able to access
I'm free zoom that's gonna be cut off. Yeah. Yeah, although we will have to resume another meeting in a few minutes
Because we're using the free version
But will you a number of times on my podcast? I have given some kind of cursory introduction to your work
But I you know, I was on a 12-hour drive in 2020 and I stumbled across your podcast
and I just listened to it on the whole drive up to Portland and
Will you tell and I think that at that point you had it was like I
Identify a few different phases and this was definitely like your first phase
Will you tell us about like kind of what you started this podcast like what the content was and what brought you to making that content?
so in my life and especially I think in recent years since social media has been making everyone more and more stupid like really just like
Allowing you to dig into whatever stupid thing that you're into and just like like, you know
Find that total niche that you could totally dive
Full core in with like no effort like when we were kids you'd have to go to the library to be that stupid
You know, you'd have to go find your Lyndon LaRouche books or who knows what but now
You just can sit there on the toilet and take a dump
So I was getting frustrated and I realized like people just don't know the basic things about politics
Like all this like what the left and the right is that was the big thing that was bugging me and people like especially where I'm in
Quebec people vote based on like who's the Anglophone Party and who's the Frank like Frank
Better for the Federalist the Federalist Party versus the Nationalist Party and I'm like you're a single mom on welfare
The party that you're voting for is gonna raise that they they're campaigning on raising the costs for your child care
Like that you know, like what are you doing? What's like so I was like, okay
Let's explain what left and what right are and and there's a lot of confusion about it because in those culture
Worst stuff people use them, you know in certain ways that aren't right, so I thought okay
I'm gonna make these easy
Dumb dumb videos to explain basic stuff to people and I sat down and I'm like hey, you know what?
How do you define left and right? I'm not a hundred percent sure like I started writing and I'm like, I don't know what I'm talking about
Let's read read something so I'm looking. I don't know look online looking in dictionaries
I'm looking at Wikipedia and everything has there's all these different definitions and none of them seem good
and
I'm like what is this and then I start going to the library and taking out but like first downloading books and then taking out
Real books and nothing
It's all garbage like you have these phd's polysci Harvard educated writing a book about left and right where they don't
Just after so no one very few people writing books about left and right
But when they do write about it at all, they don't never define it
They just use it by according to their feelings of what it is and it was just a fucking shit show
So I just read and read and read until I finally sort of figured out
What this has to mean for it to make any sense like either it makes no sense and it's garbage
Or it makes sense and it has to mean hierarchy on the right versus equality on the left hierarchy of decision-making power
Equality of decision-making power and and as I went down that rabbit hole
I realized more and more like okay
Well, we don't know what anything means like Paul it even the word politics. Nobody knows what that means the word government the word
Just capitalism social not nobody knows what anything means and people will write a book about capitalism
Without once defining it people will write a book about socialism without once defining it
And I'm like this is that's why everything's so stupid first of all
Like you can't have a conversation if nobody is talking about the same thing like if I'm talking about
Robin and in my head Robin is a seven-year-old girl
Who's really nice and volunteers at the church or whatever and you're talking about Robin and Robin is some like 50-year-old dude
Who's in in prison for murder like and I'm saying oh, I love Robin and you're like what do you mean?
You know, this is what's what's half. This is the conversations people are having
I kind of I used to have a lot of debates about the Israeli Palestinian conflict when I was younger
And I saw that because people grew up with completely different histories of the region. They were having this kind of
You know chaotic inability tower of Babel conversations
So I just sat down like okay
I'm gonna have to do a fucking research so like to do a video on what the left and right is I had to do like a
Research project like a master's thesis because no one as far as I could tell no one had done it before everyone
You know and then I politics and then you know and I started realizing okay
I'm building actually a theory system. I'm not really inventing anything new
I'm just getting at stuff that's already out there
But that making a bit more sense of it than anyone has done or just paying attention to things that people are taking for granted and sometimes
Correctly sometimes incorrectly using so I'm like let's build this theoretical foundation and the more you do that
The more everything makes sense like left and right are about equality versus hierarchy equality versus hierarchy of what well
If you read that the word politics means decision-making in groups, then you realize that it's about that
It's not about a quality of like Jordan Peterson's always done, you know quality of talent so quality of
You know result of this
Yes, yes exactly exactly so oh the left is terrible because they don't want anyone to have you don't want any excellence like a chest
You know in chest. There's hierarchies and in sports. There's hierarchies
Well, yeah, but it doesn't matter if you're the gold medalist you still can't tell the bronze medalist to like you know
lick your
Balls and like clean your house, but you know wealth equality does allow that because wealth equals power and then I you know
And once we realize that the word politics, there's a book called private government by
Elizabeth Anderson and she was basically just focusing on how corporations are basically government
We see that more and more nowadays because you know on Twitter freedom of speech is not ruled by the
The government or the Constitution it's ruled by Twitter and YouTube and Facebook
they're the ones who decide whether you can speak or not they are the government and
Once you realize that politics is about decision-making in groups and a group could be your family
It could be the government. It could be the state
It could be the the corporation
Well, then you realize that all these things are the same and politics works the same way as in a corporation
As it does in the state and by just focusing on the state
We're completely ignoring all the politics and our regular lives and we're ignoring the government
People like I hate the government because I don't like anybody tell me what to do
But I go to McDonald's every day and my boss tells me how to dress and how to smile and how to stand and how to act
And what's aware, you know that becomes invisible in your life. You don't even notice it
It's just the air that you breathe. So I'm just trying to
Make all this stuff clear to use categories use words to
Make realities code, you know things separate things that should be separated like, you know all this
like, uh
Identity politics, but like, oh, I'm gonna vote for the the nationalist party. I'm kebekwa
So rich kebekwa and poor kebekwa. We're all gonna vote for the same party
You know a lot of the identity stuff is like this
Oh, I vote for the black candidate because I'm black even though it's like some super rich person
And I'm not in that category at all. I should be aligning this other way class makes more sense, you know
so
Categories definition should all be about clarifying things separating things that should be separated
Joining things that should be joined and that's what I'm doing
And then I sort of dipped into anthropology for all this because you can't actually
Understand how many this works without understanding anthropology, but that's a whole other
Level, I don't know if anything I just said makes sense, but and it seems like
It seems like a lot of the orientation
is to
Get people to realize
That they're kind of always participating in political processes and to
Essentially like figure out where their agency is
Was it's like that thing where you if you don't have any terms to understand the situation you're in
100% like
What, you know, right like I've been doing this whole going on this whole tear
This whole tangent that became like this year-long thing about materialism versus idealism
Like the material conditions that shape like how do conscious choice and material realities
Interact like where does con?
You know, do we just choose our social structure or does the environment determine our social structure?
how does that work and
The reason I'm doing that is exactly we're talking about agency like if I can understand the whole point of this podcast
And the reason I started even just doing the left and right thing is I just wanted people to
Stop being so confused and do things
act in ways that help them
The way they want to act in ways that achieve the things they want to achieve like recently
I was just telling you about my buddy who's all into these insane ukraine conspiracies and into every conspiracy
And the guy's like all into this crazy right-wing stuff and he supports this lunatic right-wing party in canada
And we sit down and we have you know, I engage him in conversation
And he's left-wing on everything like he wants corporations to pay 10 times more tax
He wants, you know, almost everything. He's like super left-wing almost socialist
So what I want is okay, if you're really a right-winger and you like those
And that's what you want. Well, at least know how to articulate it and understand it
But most people are going to actually figure out that they're actually left-wing if they
Sit down and actually know what these terms mean and analyze the things they believe in and the things that they like so
And once you realize that you can figure out who your friends are who your enemies are
And what sorts of things I haven't gotten too deep into how to achieve things
But that's where I'm going with all this like the next phase of the podcast eventually going to be
What are the strategies that people have used in the past like there's
You know electoralism rioting
Pressure campaigns passive resistance terrorism war like all these things what works what doesn't work?
When does it work? Why doesn't it work? Like what are the conditions that makes?
Oh, why was this riot all of a sudden got this legislation?
But that riot just got everybody killed and shot like what's the you know, how does action
Work, you know, how do we act?
So before you can act you still need to know what your left foot is and where your right foot is
So you can walk out the door and not fall down the stairs
Yeah
and it seems like I mean there's
This reality that the way that these terms
That we use every day in political discourse and have no consensus definitions of whatsoever
Like the way that a given person is using a given term is actually highly revealing
Of where they're at politically and it seems like a lot of the confused terms
Were kind of confused on purpose or at some point, you know, like they reflect they reflect marketing and framing
Largely on the part of the right. It seems like mostly
Yes, but you have to be careful how you define right so
This is essentially and this sort of this totally gets like we're gonna end up talking totally about your podcast and what you've been talking about
Like this all is going to blend into like what you've been talking about lately with right brain left brain stuff because we're
Totally doing these parallel projects that seem like they're very different
But it's like we're totally doing the same thing in completely different spheres. So wait, what did you just say?
Uh, oh, why do the terms get confused?
Okay, so part of the reason terms got confused like left and right
It's just because Pete no usually when someone comes up with a new term
They didn't sit down and just like think i'm going to make up this term. What's it going to mean?
Let's create a fine definition. They just sort of feel it. They just throw out something
Oh, this sounds right. This feels right and it sort of gets picked up by the zeitgeist and it goes somewhere
but
eventually different
Interested actors are interested in different things. So elites
Don't like the regular definition of left and right because it focuses on the conflict between hierarchy and equality
And right wing. So the forces of the left are those people who want there to be equality
Of decision-making power, which usually implies equality of wealth on on a strong level
And the forces of the right are those people who want to embolden strengthen existing hierarchies, right?
So if you
Are part of a hierarchical system, you don't really want people thinking about the hierarchical system
Like that's no you want people to think you don't know like we're all just one family
Like the typical metaphor that you have in a lot of medieval taxes
Well, you know the king or the ruling class is the brains who do all the thinking
So the working class or the peasants or the slaves. Well, these are the hands
You know god created the brain and grabbed me the hands and if you
Separate the if you cut off the head and you equalize everyone whether you've decapitated the body and we all die
This is not, you know, it's not hierarchy. It's just unity. It's one and so you
Typically right wingers don't like that those definitions. They're much more attracted to definitions like
The market versus the state because first of all, the right wingers love this state when it's doing what they want
Like booting out immigrants or or beating up people poor people in the street or whatever it is
But they don't like the state when it's like, you know taking taxes from them
So it's not about the market versus the state but by focusing on market versus the state
You get everyone to hate that part of the state that actually helps equalize people, you know, it's just that part of this, you know, so
To me when all this fell apart it was the right, but it was the socialist
Right. It was the right in disguise. So
once
Well, it was like a an accident conspiracy between the soviet union
elites and the capitalist western elites basically
uh
The soviet union for historical reasons turned into a very hierarchical system, right?
The idea was supposed to be, you know, socialism working class rule
But it just became this this party rule, you know party ruling the working class as if they're a capitalistic and
So they don't like
They didn't want to focus on equality
They see them well their whole just their raison d'etre is we are the left. We are socialism
Well, if you focus too much on equality, you're going to notice there's some discrepancies there, you know
They had an extremely hierarchical system Emma Goldman wrote this great article about, you know
The soviet union is not socialist like socialism is equality and look at how many hierarchies
There's the manager the middle manager like 18 ranks of people in each enterprise and they get paid differently
And have different levels of power and privileges and this and that so
They that's the market versus the state becomes a much more appealing
uh definition to the soviet elites
uh because they represent the state the state is the good guys who are or you know, um
Helping out the people and pushing out economic equality, but they don't want you to think about political equality
Meanwhile, the west also doesn't want you to think so much about equality
um
They like the idea that you're associating the state with this horrible dictatorship, you know, that's suppressing freedoms in so many ways
So that sort of just catches on it's not like any soviet ideologists just sat down and started, you know
Just defining left and right that way that just became the zeitgeist
It made sense to the powers that be around the world and then that's what just floats up
That's how
We just feel it man
Well, that's how people felt it right at the time those people with power and that's what gets taught in schools
And that's just makes everybody confused and uh idiot
Yeah, and then I mean right and so there's that whole reality that
Orienting people towards the variables of like hierarchy versus equality
Is going to tend to
Diminish hierarchies like point like pointing out hierarchies
And and that is the amazing thing is that people can't like what is so noteworthy about
Our our politics as it exists at this time is that is both, you know, this
Incredible confusion like this disagreement about what anything means but also people's inability to see
The power dynamics that shape their lives is like and it seems like that's
That's this place that
It feels like our projects really converge is the sense that we're trying to
Go to the fundamentals where we're like, all right
Everybody's trying to sound very clever
And everything but it seems like there's some core assumptions that we don't share
and you know like
it was just
literally like
Getting a basic characterization of the political situations that we're in
Seems like this really radical which says so many bad things
About all the academics and you know, like very serious people and like the chattering classes or whatever
in all the time that they've spent talking about
Politics
right
They don't even know how to define the fucking word and they have you know, we have a political science department
What's politics? Oh, it's the state or something, dude
And you went to you you experienced the academic side of this, right?
Tell me about that
Okay, just to remind a second
Oh, fuck. I have too many ideas in my head at the same time. Um
Just imagine a surgeon
Trying to do an operation
But he didn't have the technical language of what the appendix is or what this little
Body part is or what this little part of the organ is like if you just uh
Give me a give me a and they don't know what the scalpel give me that knife over the no, not the small knife
The bigger knife. Oh, yeah that knife that knife, uh, okay cut that part over there
The what the doohickey like in between the lung and the heart thing that that would
Like if you don't have words for stuff and they're not
If we're not speaking the same language, you're just gonna fucking massacre your patient, right?
And by the time you even figure out which knife to use the guys are already dead
So that's what our politics is and it's like you're saying it's designed that way by accident on purpose, right?
Like we have all these institutions Harvard as like a 7 zillion dollar endowment every year and they don't
Like when you write a book about capitalism, you don't define it
Nobody laughs at you or fails you everybody claps and you get a book deal and you get you know, you're you're given tenure
That's not it's garbage in any hierarchical society
The political theory is going to be crap on some level, right? Like medieval political theory
crap
You know, I can't remember what they believed but you know the chain the great chain of being all these nonsense that they believed
But it was crap, but it's crap that served elites today
You have so much crap, you know, you have some stuff that's good
But it's like buried in crap and all the post-modernist stuff, for example
It's all geared towards not being able to understand anything
Communicate anything or do anything and we'll talk about that a bit more when we get into
The students and the suffering I'm talking about later. So
Uh, yeah, so academia
God, there's so yeah, what I
realized in academia
And reading about the like that book discipline minds that that uh, I told you about that used to be
Amazing book. Yeah, I finished it. Yeah
So the theory in that book and at first I read this right before I went to grad school
And I thought oh this and I went to grad school older
Which is why I'm able to have these thoughts because the thing is in our society
You go from age
Four or three when you're in like pre kindergarten daycare and you're staying in school
Until and if you're at the high levels of intellectual, you know work
You're in school till you're like 30 something
From zero to 30 something and in all that time you've had like
Barely any life experiences outside of school if you've had sex if you've had a job if you've had anything
Heartbreak it's all been in the context of these fucking school
So you are the one of the most brainwashed people imaginable and how are you supposed to understand
Any of the things you're reading through your life experience when you don't have any life experience and that's so
Much what's happening in school. So I was like 10 years older than everybody and
um
I read this book called discipline minds where his basic thesis and he's uh, he was a physics professor the editor of a
The most prestigious physics academic journal
And he basically said that the whole point of grad school not undergrad undergrad is usually more fun
but the whole point of grad school is to
Crush the future professionals mind their spirit
So that they can divorce
their actions
from their
Moral feelings and sentiments and ideology. Well, this is just my job. I just got to do my job
Basically, they're turning everyone into eight off my feet, right? Well, yeah, I don't like this
But well, I got to do it if I don't do it someone else is going to do it. Well, this is what they pay me for
I got to do what I'm paid for, you know
And he
Breaks down how this process happens how if you're somebody who's not going to fit into that
Molder be crushed in that way you're going to get ejected from the university in some way or another you're going to quit
How they deprive you of food of time of sleep
So that your mind is primed to accept all of this
Ideology that's being shoved down your throat and how and I noticed especially like where I went
There's very much this and it's very like wasp culture. There's this
I come, you know, I'm jewish, you know, half moroccan jewish
It's very loud yelling at people culture, you know, very direct culture. Well academia is like very waspy
It's very passive aggressive. It's very hint based
There's this italian guy in my class and he was just like, I don't understand what's going on here
He's like in italy
You know, it's very medieval the system
But at least you know what's going on like you write a paper and your your thesis master or whatever it looks at
He's like, this is a garbage. This is stupid. Don't give me this. Give me a good one
And he tells you what to do and then you do it and he likes it
Whether that's good or not. It doesn't matter. What matters is that at least you know what to do
Whereas in the anglo system in the waspy world and that, you know
academia in the in the north america
They're just like you just get a c he told me and he's like, well, why did I get a c and so he asked the teacher
Oh, what should I do better and the teacher's like?
Well, that's not exactly what we're doing here
And they just say these weird passive aggressive things that don't tell you what to do
So you're just like, what the fuck is it the way I wrote is my english bad?
Is it my phrasing should I did I not cite enough authors that the teacher likes?
And so what it's 10 times more powerful than telling you what to do because if I tell you what to do
You just do it
But if I don't tell you what to do you're so insecure and so scared that you're looking around you for cues
About what to do at every second of the day. Oh all the other students are sitting like this
I should sit like this. Oh, he writes like this
You know, and you're just copying everything that everybody does you're becoming this totally conformed
Being I don't know if
He gets into that too much Schmidt gets into that in disciplined minds
But he basically just gets into how they break you down
And that was one of the things that I was seeing in academia like this kind of rain of terror
Where you're just afraid of everything and nobody tells you anything you have to guess and
And then finally
Then you get that a and you don't exactly know why but you know that whatever you're doing now works
So you just keep doing you know and then you feel so good because you've been it's so this environment
So all encompassing and it takes up, you know, you're working from the second you wake up to the second
You go to sleep and and now you're getting and with no intrinsic rewards
That even the work you're doing is often really boring because if you try to do an interesting project
That's not been done before or something that's new
Well, you're gonna start writing and then you're gonna realize like oh shit. My theory wasn't exactly right
I made a mistake which always happens when you have a good idea like something original
So then you got a backtrack and you start all over but you don't have time to start all over in grad school
They literally give you more work than you could possibly do they tell you oh, yeah
I'm giving you 300 pages to read this week. Your other teacher is giving you 300 pages your other like you can't possibly do
So what you have to learn how to do is pretend to read the stuff that you read
You have to read diagonally, which means skim it just enough
So read the conclusion on the introduction and then you skim the rest and then when you're in school
In class you just pretend that you read it and you just talk about stuff
And if the teacher doesn't notice you're good
That's that's what school is and we had the chair of our department
Even told us we had all the new grad students. There was like eight of us. He says
So he has like an introductory meeting when I write a book review
I don't actually read the book
And we're all just like what and our mouths are like wide open and then he saw
You know, he said he said I just read the introduction and the conclusion
And then I write the review and all of our mouths were like wide open
We're like what and he's like
He did I think no no then of course I read the book after just to make sure I didn't make any mistakes
He's like which with bullshit. There's no way and he says but my point is that once you
When you do your phd thesis when you go do your anthropology field work
So when you go out to go live with the you know, the hunter-gatherers or wherever you're living
Once you you're supposed to stay there for like two or three years
But once you're there for two months, you know everything you're gonna know you need to know just write your thesis right then and there
And then maybe I'll change your mind here and there and then you can adapt it, but you're you know
It's just fucking insanity. It's such garbage and it really
Says it explains a lot about our society and have a lot of
also when you see the deterioration between
Materialist thinking that was happening in the 50s and the 60s and 70s and 80s
And just how it all became this post-modernist
Stuff where the whole the whole thing about materialism is that it enables you to actually
Discover the sources of why things happen and then to do something about them
But the whole point of post-modernism
Is an attack on the idea that
Anything happens for any reason
Basically and it basically what at the end of the does it just triples you from actually doing anything
You can talk about it. You can wank off. You can this plus, but you can't do anything
And if you ask why this happens, why does this hunter-gatherer group do this?
People get really uncomfortable like you're you're oh
You're essentializing like why do they do that? Well, that's their internal super spaceman hunter-gatherer logic
You can't know why anybody does anything if you say it's because of some material cause you're taking away their
Agency and your racist. Meanwhile, the same person who looks at a politician and says, oh that guy's taking a bunch of money
That's why he voted this way. That's we all do that every day. That's cool
If you do the same thing for a person who wears a grass skirt. Oh, no, that's not they can't do that
They're whole, you know, they're not human their spaceman like it's just so it's so upside down racist
And that's the left
The fake left and the right today are both super super racist
But just in different ways that the right is racist in this very straightforward way
There's these people these people are better than those people and that's why they have more wealth because they deserve it
That's like you're straight up right wing thought
But your fake left wing thought which is right wing thought at the end of the day is
Oh, these are special people. They're they're precious ponies. They
They're not like us. They're superhuman spacemen. We worship them. We feel guilty about them
We just use them to make ourselves feel good about ourselves and to jack off
We don't actually care about them. We don't actually respect them. We don't actually see them as human beings
They're just tools for our own elevation, you know, and it's it's they're both dividing conquer strategies
geared towards which was what you are doing is speak that brain science stuff about
Who you know, who tends left openness to experience versus close to experience
That's the brain science heart of like who's attracted to left and right parties. Well
These are two right wings
But and to divide and conquer politics but targeted towards two different kind of brains
Psychologies. Yeah, exactly. Yeah, the same shit. It's divide and conquer make everybody racist
Make everybody uncomfortable with each other make everybody divided
But one is for people who like to feel like they're not racist and one is for people who feel comfortable being racist, you know
Yeah, it's it's really bewildering to me honestly how much
This has become this like
dominant theme in my life and my work and it's one of the ways that our projects like really strongly converge like
I'm not from, you know, I didn't go to school. I did I did a couple years of community college and called it good
So it's not like
This recurrent
Theme of being like, oh, we really have to understand how academia shapes
Our societies and our politics. It's not like that came out of some personal
Like, you know, you can see how somebody who goes to grad school
Might be biased towards thinking about what happens in grad school
You know disproportionately affects like the whole world, right?
You know, but I like twitter is so important because i'm on twitter
Exactly or whatever right and i'm not subject to that bias, but it's the case, you know, like I did some podcasts critiquing
Exactly that how like, you know post reality academia
Ended up influencing, you know, what it's like to be at a meeting, you know
And like how much right you can like feel like we have common terms to understand one another and form alliances
And I got so many emails from people
Who either are in or you know, like have a background in academia who are like, thank you so much
It's a cult
I it was like, you know, I felt so crazy
And and then like yeah, like reading discipline minds and I've also just like been digging around and there's just like account after account after account
And that was sort of my so so my impression from the outside for a long time was I definitely thought that
schooling in the like k through 12
Sense of it was mostly not about teaching people things and was mostly about
inculcating discipline, right
And you know like certain a certain behavior and a certain like frame of mind
Especially for lower-class schools if you get into higher-class schools, it's totally different. Yeah, I'll bet. I'll bet. Yeah
But everywhere that I went to school
I was like what they're teaching us is to submit, you know to sit to sit down and be quiet and just like suck it up
Yeah, do it. Yeah do it. You're told yep
You know, and I kind of thought that that dynamic lessened
in in like a higher education and now I'm like, oh, no, they save the like really intense like
Breakdown your whole personality cult programming shit for graduates
Yeah, like undergrad is kind of like a little bit more free seems like kind of more free to do what you want
You're introduced to all these ideas, you know professors can be a bit more wacky and a bit more like
Thing but then once you get into grad school, you're like, why do I feel so icky?
You don't even know what's happening. You just feel weird. Like you're being abused. Yeah
I remember reading that book thinking like, oh, this is like pretty conspiracy theory. Like, yeah, I kind of
I get it. He's just exaggerating because you know, he's got to write a book and okay
It's cool to exaggerate because it gets your point across
But then within two weeks, I was like, holy shit. This is real
This is straight up real like how does he know like did he go here like what's going on and
Yeah, random thing but just
To the point of how practical knowledge has been completely lost by this post-modernist wave
So all that most of the teachers the teachers like who are like in their 40s and younger were all like super
grew up in post-modernist, you know clout trap and some of them were really cool. Some of them were assholes, but
None of them had any materialist education whatsoever
So like I was doing this class with the teacher was really cool and it was about
Charity the class was about care or whatever this this we're learning about Indian charities
And one of the ideas in this like in the brahmin
Charity is that when you give money, you have to disconnect yourself from the money that you're giving and not
Go follow up on what's happening with your money. Are they using it for a good cause?
Like what does this organization do?
You just have to give it and that's the spear and there's some kind of ideology beyond that behind that
And I was like, oh, that's funny. Well, that's obviously done
So that the people can just do whatever they want with the money like right? It's just like it's part of a scam
it's a griff right and the teacher and the students were like, wow
Like I never thought of that like there were some people that
When you brought up materialist stuff like that they got really uncomfortable and they thought you're essentializing within
There's other people who are just like wow, that's interesting. That's a really interesting
But I was like, what do you mean it's interesting? It's the most obvious thing. Give me money. Don't think about it. Just give it
Don't tell me, you know, don't don't ask what I'm doing with it. Don't worry. It's cool. I'm doing cool stuff with it
Go pray in your temple
But like those kind of things don't occur to you because you've been fucking slammed with
This kind of ideology of like don't think about why anything happens
Don't explain what you can ask who what where when
But you can't ask why, you know, like and that's what that's about. Sorry. That was a tangent, but
I just had that in my head
And what you studied anthropology, right?
Yeah, yeah, it's history not the budget. Yeah, so that gets us into
That's the pivot like
you
you took those classes and
Came out of that experience having
However much utilitarian sort of political knowledge that you did
But you've been doing podcasts that are heavily feature
anthropological literature
And and really like it seems like there's basically been two phases of that one where you did some kind of introductory
Stuff and you like define some terms
and and now you've been
Really grinding on this critique of the dawn of everything. Yeah, which is itself this very interesting
testament to like
The weird ways that academic notions have shaped our fucking politics. Yeah. Yeah
So so like I was saying in every society the political theory is going to be bad
And the idea is to make people stupid so that they can't rebel right and it's not a conscious theory
It's just works. That's just the way ideas filter up and down. Oh, we should talk about
Because all what you're talking about a political activist meetings and how the sort of
Academia stuff has filtered down into those
But I'll tell you it's interesting because it filtered up into academia in the first place
Because when I in the 90s 1990s because I'm 29 years old is when I remember that kind of
Very defensive identity politics stuff was actually kind of cool in that right era
because it was people who are used to being abused or often just literally abused and they're like
I'm who I am. Fuck you. Don't don't look at me wrong. Don't talk them. Don't talk about me in a dismissive way
I insist on being called this and they were taking their space and healing themselves, right?
Like that's what I felt like that politics was real people down to earth people and then
That whenever anything gets picked up into a university context into especially a rich kids university context
Well, what is the fucking 200 000 in your you know a dollars a year kid know anything about you know
You know all these experiences, but they're if you're attracted to that and you're rich
It's because you like that aggressive bullying component of it, right?
You like and it becomes an ideology of domination and control. I know the secret words
Oh, you didn't you know, what are the secret words? I'm not telling you
I'm not here to explain you politics go research on your own
You know go do your own emotional labor and then but then you say the wrong word. Ah, you're fired
You're cancelist or whatever like it's this insane ideology. It's like I believe in restorative justice
But if somebody says the wrong word, they need to be fired. They need to you know
I need to burn in hell
It's this complete insanity because you take any idea whether it's christianity
Socialism anti-racism feminism great ideas that are a threat to power
You filter them through this university of rich kids and then it gets morphed and deformed into this horrible ugly monster
Right and then gets spat out into this garbage thing and that's what's going into the the corporation
Oh, sorry everyone. How did I get into the anthropology in my podcast?
So the reason and I'm still going to go back to doing definitional things
I just I got detoured basically what happened is I talked about left and right hierarchy versus equality
And I realized like oh well, you know
This is actually a fundamental split in human politics since the dawn of humanity
Right because as far as we know early humans were all egalitarian hunter-gatherers or mostly egalitarian hunter-gatherers
And our ancestors before that were hierarchical and we had this kind of egalitarian revolution
And then eventually after the advent of agriculture, we ended up all hierarchical again
So it's always been this this inherent conflict between people who want more power and to dominate others
And people trying to prevent those people from dominating them
That's left and right and that's not just something that happened in the french revolution
Which is where those terms came from but I think those are something fundamental to the human being and our species were actually born
in a conflict between
Dominators and the dominated and the dominate and the the general population won that fight
We can talk about that later
But so I just kind of said this boilerplate stuff that you read in a lot of books, you know
Oh, uh, you know human beings were egalitarians until 12,000 years ago, blah, blah, blah
And then I get all these annoying fucking anarchist kids who are like
David graver and david windrow just debunked that idea and I'm like what?
Oh, fuck that and I had read that
Their article in 2015, right?
And it really pissed me off when I read it
But I was like, okay, whatever, you know, I guess, you know
People don't know anything about anthropology one way or other
So this is this isn't a big deal
But then once I start actually talking about this stuff and I'm sorry
Like the idea that human beings were originally egalitarian is mind blowing
Like this changed my life when I discovered this stuff when I was a kid
I discovered anthropology by accident. I was uh deep into jazz music
And I was reading some cold train biography and he was listening to the music of the pygmies
And then I just read a book about the pygmies and then I was like, what what the fuck is this?
How do they have gender equality?
How do they have no no leaders? How this is like unbelievable?
And what I saw is the most and then I read more and realized that oh my god
It's possible that most human beings live this way until you know about 12 000 years ago and then
I think the most hopeful thing on earth and then there's david graver saying like, oh, that's garbage
Stupid everything everyone who believes that thinks that human beings are all children
And anyways, whatever fine, but then I'm putting out this boilerplate stuff where I'm just trying to explain how
Hierarchy happens because there's ways that we can like study that and we we have tons of examples of it
Where does male domination come from? These aren't giant mysteries
And then I have like, oh david graver says that that's not true
So now I had to do another video just to explain why that whole thesis was wrong and stupid
And then people gave me even more shit and then their fucking book was coming out and like fuck this
I'm gonna do this whole fucking, you know, first of all, I was gonna read the whole article
It was called farewell to the childhood of man and there's another one called how to change the course of human history
I'm like this shit is garbage
I'm gonna read this fucking from because all these people are accusing me of not having understood it or not this or
I'm misrepresenting it
Like I'm gonna read this fucking shit from top to bottom and dissect it and you're gonna see how stupid this is because if you
Don't have the knowledge like those those articles in this book
Especially the book is worse are predicated on you not having knowledge of the things they're talking about
Because when you do you realize like oh my god, this is terrible like when I read that book
I'm like, oh, this is awesome
But all the parts that I thought were awesome were things I don't know anything about so it sounded awesome
But I don't know as soon as I read about something I know about I like this is the most offensive garbage
I've ever seen it's not just like insulting and wrong and it makes you stupid
so
Anyhow the book came out
I started doing that and then I'm just just got lost and I've been doing it since like august
And I'm still like I'm doing this almost full time
Like it takes me four to six weeks to make a fucking episode of this
It's I'm I'm losing my mind. I fucking hate this book at this point
I'm losing it because I'm just been drowning it for ages, but it's a great
Opportunity because it's a famous book and people are into it and if you don't know anthropology
It's an exciting book and it's worth the reading because it will introduce you to all these great
Anthropological anecdotes and the most important questions of our time. How do we get stuck in hierarchy?
Nobody's talking about that like as much as I hate the book kudos to graver and wengro that they asked that question
It's so important. Why isn't anyone talking about this anymore since the the 70s and 80s?
Uh, and then they're asking how do we get stuck and and they're they're pointing to anthropology
Which is the place where you can learn how do we get stuck and how do we get unstuck?
Which is what we want right except
Because they're so fucking their heads are so deep in their asses
they don't just
Not answer their question
They literally bury all the parts of the knowledge that they're presenting which could which do answer their questions
Like every time they cite a book
They bury all the parts that actually explain this hierarchical phenomenon or that hierarchical phenomenon and then they just talk a bunch of bullshit
It's like it makes me so angry. It's almost like a conspiracy to make it stupid
but it's just
And the motivations are good
But it's just dumb and it's because like I went back to when we were in a society that has the hierarchical society the
institutions of ideology and political theory are always crap and david graver and david wengbro
Like every like all of us grew up in the society and their heads are full of crap like everybody's heads full of crap
So i'm taking that as an opportunity
It's not so much about the book. It's about the theory that i'm trying to teach through the book, right?
I'm trying to teach materialist theory. How do we explain where male domination comes from?
Okay, david graver had this nonsense explanation
This is what we actually know and you know and people are really i'm getting really great feedback
It's mind-blowing stuff like if I read this one
I was if I read david graver when I was a kid my mind would have been blown
But if I read this shit when I was a kid my mind would have been you know nuclear blown like this is
Gallagher brain
Yeah, exactly
Yeah, yeah, I mean it's so I I just think it's this really interesting testimony
to how
Rather than you know, like
academia being this sort of like
this
gradual progress and this like
You know emergence of consensus through like rigorous how it really is like thomas coon or whoever would describe like
it's like there's these different tribes
And they just have totally different like just like utterly irreconcilable world views that they're claiming
Are correct through the like the scientific perception of their analysis and it's like
the fucking like what the narratives that the dawn of everything
Are pushing back against
Are insane like like those are also you know where it's like humans have no agency like we have no political agency
And we're like automata
Who are just kind of like moving through history
Waiting for the next threshold, you know the next agricultural or urban revolution or the next bronzage
And then we're it's everything's going to change and we're not going to think about it
and it's like that's
That's like the insane caricature that actually does dominate in like a lot of disciplines and and in our society
But then like but then they were like so what if we came up with a different caricature
Where everybody just like
frivolously like, you know
It's just on mushrooms. Yeah, I always call there's these like the shroom shroom shrooming thesis. Yeah, it's just like hyper conscious
Let's just change our social structure, dude
Like everyone's fucking high out of their fucking minds. All right, let's have patriarchy
Awesome, and everybody just morphs and the way they describe it. They describe hierarchy as play
Grand theater the closest they come to reality is they call it temporary experience. Oh, I know
Why don't I be a slave for my entire life out of temporary expedience? Okay, you know
And anyways, but it's just and it's super insulting to indigenous people
They keep attacking scholars for infantilizing indigenous people
But like what do you think you're doing by turning them into barney the purple dinosaur who doesn't have any
Connection to the material world and it's just kind of like for nonsense reasons deciding patriarchy is cool this winter, you know
It's literally like margaret mead shit, you know where she was like
Like the samoans are gentle people who do not have conflicts and just frolic in the grass before in their grass spurts before
They have sex and it's like
You're robbing them of essential human qualities as a samoan elder said and then yeah the same with graver and wengro
It's like and then they just frivolously
But but I want to push back against some of the stuff you're saying because
So the the the stuff that they're attacking like where people are just automata like automatons and they have no agency
That's dead. That's that was that died
At the 90s at most like it's that by the 70s eight like
They're talking they're talking about a caricature like they're they're they're beating a dead horse like that's finished
No one does that anymore and actually
So that was some really
Stupid terrible marxist
Anthropologists who did the worst kind of materialism that you could do
Um, you know, there's good marxist anthropology for sure, but there's this crap and and it was like that
um
And yeah, it was
Not great, but it's done. It's finished and they're talking about it
Like they're pretending that anthropology is still in that state and they're pretending that anybody who says
human being started out as egalitarian foragers
Is doing that and everybody that says that human beings started out as egalitarian foragers is
Thinks of those foragers as a smart village as some kind of fairy tale
Like there's a famous book from the early 60s the forest people by Colin Turnbull
That's actually the first anthropology book that I read and the one that blew my mind
But okay that book it's like the margaret mead. It's written in that style of like it's a fairy tale
It's written for a popular audience
So it's it is a bit of a fairy tale and the pygmy there's a pygmy people
So they're like four four, you know four foot ten. So I could see okay. I could see how you can find this insulting
It's very romanticized
it's also
Mind-blowing in a lot of ways, but but the point is yeah
I bet david graver read that book when he was the fucking, you know in college and that
And he there's probably some really annoying hippie professors who are pushing that crap on him and that
Colored his whole idea of hunter-gatherer literature and he just never
Reinvestigated it until a year before he wrote the book because I he never talked about those societies like
You have to understand what a big mind-blowing experience
It was for anthropology when in the 1960s
So we've been in this cold war right since the the late 40s early 50s
Telling us that you can have equality or you can have liberty. You can't have both right
Either you're gonna be like the soviet union or the united states with all kinds of poverty and people dying in the streets
That's your choice. So suddenly we discover and humanity human like the soviet union
You know communism is against human nature. That's the stuff that I grew up understanding, you know
That's what I that's what I always heard from everybody not just school
That's just from people on the street parents friends teachers
So here it is in 19 in the late 1960s. We discover wait a second
There are all these hunter-gatherer societies who don't have hierarchy. They don't have men dominating women
They don't have alpha males. They don't have chiefs. They don't have, you know, the shaman doesn't have any power
and
They're not perfect like they're, you know, okay force people with a bit of a caricature book
But there's tons of books that are there's no caricature here. It's not like painting it as utopia
But they're really
It really was a thing where people like wait a second. This is really important. We should learn about this
How do they do this? We thought this is against human nature and these are happy people in general
They tend to be happier than their neighbors who are doing farming and and have hierarchy
What is it about them? And we also realize like they're the economy
every single society that has that hyper egalitarian structure
All do the same type of hunting and gathering
And it's probably the type of hunter and gathering that our earliest ancestors did and that most
Uh of humans did for the first, you know, 200 000 plus years of our existence
So there's a good chance that human beings were mostly like these societies for, uh, you know, there's debates about this
I'm not going to get into it
But the idea that it's possible that human nature might be egalitarian instead of hierarchical
Or just the possibility that we're even capable of egalitarianism was so mind-blowing with such a big thing
It was so important politically and it makes me so mad that david graver just has no interest in it
What like you're dead now, but he had no interest in this whatsoever
This wasn't you know, especially as an anarchist anthropologist. Guess what dude? These societies are anarcho communist societies
That is what they are. They are free and equal and how does that work? No interest doesn't care
Hey, how did we get unstuck? Well, maybe we'll look at these
Societies that are super unstuck. What can we learn from them when he actually talks about them in chapter four?
He kind of in says that they're stupid. Like he's just like, oh, that's depressing. Why we don't want to do that
It's dumb. They don't need, you know
What's happening? So, um, no, fuck it. Anyways, I forget what I'm talking about
But the point is that they are presenting a caricature of that stuff. It's not true
That stuff was true in the 70s
Uh, and I just think that they hadn't read any literature. Oh, yeah
So in his entire career, he doesn't write the anarchist anthropologist doesn't write one article
Doesn't mention
He mentioned one in passing but he never says anything about any actual egalitarian society
He keeps saying egalitarian societies, but he keeps talking about societies that have male domination
Or societies that have some form of inequality and calling that egalitarian society
As if to say well, there's no such thing as a real egalitarian society
Which he basically said a couple of times ignoring these societies. So finally between
2018 when they wrote how to change the course of human history and 2020 when the book comes out, um
He find they must have read this literature because I bet people like me were like screaming at them like fucking
You know read a book these stupid assholes and then he
Then I guess it just didn't fit into their thesis
So they just kind of squeezed it into their book in this really stupid way because everything about that literature contradicts everything they say
Um, anyways, they did a shit job and don't don't fall for the stuff
They're saying that automata stuff is not true anymore. We don't think like that nobody thinks like that and
For better and worse the post martyrness wiped that whole
anybody who thinks about materialism at all never mind like that we're automata, but just about
The material potential material influences on our choices, which is the right way to think about materialism
It's not the environment
Determines our social structure the environment limits our choices and incentivizes to make certain choices
Which is why in similar situations
We make similar choices and we see similar things like you look at the new era
pastoralists in the southern sudan and the ancient israelites who had the same kind of
Economy and guess what there's so many similar things the way that they had profits
The way that monotheism emerged like all this stuff
But that's been that's been that's been wiped out in not completely but by this post-modernist crap
Um and the post-modern stuff is infected that book very badly the whole thing about you
They hate the idea of categories and this is what's getting into your
uh most recent episodes
Between life right brain and left brain, right?
The I think it's the right brain is the one that sees the connectivity between everything
And the left brain is the one that sees separation in categories
Now as I understand what you're saying, I don't know the literature as well
But the right brain is what allows you to feel and to into it and to
Uh kind of understand on a deeper level
But the left brain the category brain is the one that actually allows you to do things because like if I can't
If I see every tree as an individual tree and I can't break them down like every category is fake on some level
But they're we use them because it's a tool right like
If I don't see this is a spruce tree. This is an oak tree if I just like no
Every tree is its own tree man
Well, you can't build a table because I don't know which tree has the right properties that I need to to make a table or to
You know, you can't which tree has syrup that I can use like you can't function without categories, right?
So the the thing that post-modernism did that was good
Is that it made a valid critique like you guys are taking categories and taking artificial constructs way too seriously
And you're treating them as if it's their science and and and you're basing
You're not even looking at reality. You're just looking at your stupid construct, right?
And reality is like deficient versus your stupid construct
So the correct solution to that is well pay more attention to what's going on and remember that these categories are just tools
They're not reality
But what they did is they're just no destroy every category destroy every theory throw everything that we've ever thought in the garbage
And now never ask why anything happens never generalize about anything only focus on agency and individuals
And it's just fucking garbage. It's neoliberal crap designed the reason it's so popular is because
In the 60s you had this whole generation of scholars who were very much into changing the world
There were people who came because university became accessible to working class people for the first time
After world war two because the gi bill
So you had all these people coming from working class backgrounds who, you know
Cared about making a better world in a way that rich people don't because the world is fine for most of them
They're coming into the university system and they're really attracted to mit marxist
Ideas and materialist ideas and practical. How do we make the world a better place?
And that's such a threat, you know that your ideological institutions can't be like that. So
Postmodernism is this wonderful thing that just makes you paralyzed and makes you unable to
Think in ways that are practical and it actually makes you it's gone to such an extent where even thinking about
Change thinking about generalizations thinking about
Doing anything is considered like almost racist
Well, and it has that it has that very distinct quality that a lot of
A lot of oppositional tendencies or analyses or whatever have a phase of you know, actually being oppositional
And then what hierarchies do rather than to like completely abolish and negate them is to co-opt them in some way
And it is definitely like
Definitely that academic tendency has that quality of something that was born in a spirit of opposition
And now just functions as a tool of the fucking power
The anti-racism, you know that move those movements that fought for civil rights and fought for
Consciousness of all these issues seeing the common humanity of all and then turns into this crazy robin d'angelo
Like, you know corporations use those kind of that that those kind of anti-racism trainings in order to make
Workers afraid of each other like that's great like if you're a corporation, you know
There's different anti-racism trainings you can do and the best anti-racism training is a union struggle, right?
There's all kinds of writers write about this like when you're fighting together
Like it's funny because all the stuff that they're talking about in that anti-racism book in the robin d'angelo book is stuff like saying like
Oh, you you have really nice hair Tara. Oh my god. You just you know, it says I'm black, you know
Like oh, I like black people's hair like that's the kind of stuff that people say that
You know, okay, if you're black that's annoying to get those comments all the time, right?
But it's a very low-level type of of racism versus on the union struggle like when you hear the union organizers talk
They're like, I never met a filipino that I like like that's the kind of racism that they're dealing with right so
in
And in the process of not just joining the union but fighting for their their wage increases and to keep certain jobs
They're just like best friends by the end of it and they're inviting each other to each other's weddings
And they have a much more understanding of each other's cultures, you know, and they have this solidarity
But if you had that kind of anti-racism training at a corporate office
Well, guess what everyone's going to unite and start fighting for their rights against management all the time
Everyone's going to want their better conditions and their wages. They're going to have that feeling of brotherhood and solidarity
You don't want that you want everybody to be so afraid. Oh my god. Is everything i'm saying racist
I just told the dude that he looks good today. Is that racist? Is this racist?
Uh
And so that's that's why that garbage is attractive in the corporate world
Because it's actually racism training pretending to be anti-racism. Yeah, exactly
Yeah
And and I do think I mean to push back slightly
I I think that I I don't know what people are doing within like the academic sphere
Exactly, but I think that that that type of thinking that like
You know, humans are like solely like our social organizations are solely these automatic
products of our subsistence mode and our technologies is like
Definitely still to be found
In I mean in graver and wenger talk about that when when somebody decides to write a book about
The future of like human societies and you know, like when like a professionally wrong person
As I've heard him describe like Francis Fukuyama, you know, who is not right about anything
But like when a guy like that decides to write a book about
How we got to where we all you know, like a uval harari or like jared diamond
They do kind of do that thing, you know, like they still invoke some version of those narratives
I mean, it's been a while since I read their books like but in general like so jared diamond is very
Look, you can use materialism in a right-wing way and actually
Materialism in social science is acceptable when it's in the right-wing sphere. Exactly like like lot, you know, ever hear about law and economics
No, my economics is what should be marxism, but it's only it's it's only popular among
So when you're in the left wing in academia, you're just jacking off about fuko and all this complete gibberish nonsense
That doesn't mean anything and that doesn't bring you any ability to do anything
But if you're in right-wing
Academia, you're studying law and economics, which is all about if I make this law
That's like like that's supposed to keep rent down like I make a rent control law
Well, it has these incentives built into it if we study the material conditions in which this law was made
Like let's say I just decide, okay, rents are capped now. You can't ever raise the rent
Well, that has some crazy incentives that are unintended consequences that we're going to have which is
Landlords won't fix the buildings anymore
Or if like if like let's say rent is capped
Except for new tenants a new tenant the landlord can come in well then the then the landlord becomes incentivized to kick out
The old tenants to get in the new tenants
so
What that should be left-wing people should be really attracted to this stuff like okay, so how do we develop
How do we do rent control in a way that actually works, you know, that doesn't
Make landlords into even worse monsters and they already are right and how do we study those material conditions?
But instead it's just right-wingers and they're just making excuses for why we can't do anything
Like if you really take that seriously, you're like well, that's why private that's why housing shouldn't be
Property it should be communal like that's why you shouldn't have market relations
Involved in property because it's you make such a mess and you're going to need such a big regulatory state to
Uh enforce all these things they need to make administrative courts too because if you have to go to court
Then it's too expensive for tenants
So then you need this administrative court, you know and then you need free lawyers and then you need you need all this stuff
Which that's actually good like I'm for all that stuff, right?
But when you really get down to it, you're like that's why you need socialism of some sort because
The inherent class conflict in in rental housing, you know is is an abomination and brings all these horrible results
Either it's the horrors of just the free market where you just you keep having to move every two years
For the the bad luck of being in a hot neighborhood because of some just rich dipshit wants, you know
Needs your place or you have all this crazy administrative state that glows or which is much better than the free market
You know, I promise you but
That stuff is popular on the right and on the left. It's like nowhere to be found
but so Jared diamonds a materialist he
Has a lot of stuff is pretty right when he's just like a dumb dumb centrist type of guy
Like I like his guns germs and steel book people see
It's so tough to to parse all this stuff because people tore that apart
But they're just jealous little shits like that book is basically correct
Yeah, he made a couple of mistakes because you have to make mistakes when you're writing these giant books
Like, you know, like I don't fault david graver and wendroper making some mistakes because you got it when you're making a 700 page book
I just thought their fundamental approach is completely wrong and their scholarship is super sloppy. I'll talk about that
They made up a whole bunch of stuff. I discovered while I was doing chapter three
I'm doing my review of chapter three and I'm like, holy fuck. They made up this they made up this
Like I don't even know what's going on, but never mind that
So, you know, but jared diamond thinks that you can't have civilization without hierarchy
Okay, uh, you know fukuyama
Like these guys are okay. They just have dumb right wing ideas. They get some of the anthropology wrong
I don't see that automatic stuff in there. Although they do think oh, well, you can't have
You know civilization without hierarchy. They all sort of agree on that. That's what I mean. Yeah
Yeah, yeah, yeah, you know, no, that's for sure. And that's a right wing thought and that's there and I
Disagree with that. I'm on your side
But that but none of those guys are gonna be making those automatic
Arguments the way you would have seen more of in the 70s and the way that the way that graver talk about it
But I mean look, I agree with graver and wendro's point that
The idea that civilization means hierarchy needs to be fought against I agree with that
It's just that the way they get there is totally upside down
Like they're not they're robbing us of the ability to understand how
The material civil conditions of civilization can actually be used for equality as well as for a hierarchy like
That's my lesson that I get out of it
But they don't want to talk about material conditions because they think that as soon as you talk about material conditions
that means that
Hunting and gathering equals equality farming equals hierarchy
civilization equals
You know hierarchy like that's not how materialism works
That's there's some dumb dumb materials that we're doing in the 70s. That's not how it works
It's it's much more liberating and exciting than that
It's about the choices people make choices
But you can kind of guess what choices we're going to make in restrictive conditions if it's the room temperature
Well, whatever I wear is my choice. I could run around a bikini. I could wear a ronald mcdonald clown suit
I could wear a three-piece suit. I have a lot of options if it's minus 40
I'm gonna wear the warmest clothes possible and you could predict 99 percent of people are gonna do that
And the one percent of people who aren't wearing the warmest clothes possible
Well, there's gonna be a reason that guys schizophrenic this guy wants to die, you know, this guy's doing a prank like
That's all that materialism is just
predicting and explaining decisions based on restrictive conditions and
It's fucking everybody does it all day long
Except we think that when we're doing it about our ancestors or indigenous societies that somehow we're taking away their agency
But guess what dude? We don't have that much
We have agency
But guess what?
I have a million choices every morning
But most people wake up and go to work every morning
Most people do the same shit all the time and there's reasons for it
Like you have other choices
But the other choices are difficult if you don't go to your job
You're gonna be fired if you're gonna be fired you might get evicted
There's all these consequences that suck that you don't know how to deal with so you're gonna do the same thing
I can predict that 99 percent of the population is going to go to their job every day
That's not taking away agency. That's dealing with the realities of you know, our conditions
I can predict that if 10 people want this apartment and there's just one apartment that the rent is going to be really high
Like that's not taking away agency
We know that when we talk about our civilization, but when we talk about everyone else
We somehow think it's a different story, which it's not people are people
Even though we don't always understand each other, you know, we have some fundamental needs and things that we can understand
Yeah, I mean the way the way that david and the graver and wengro
Like present things I really got the strong impression that
One of the core motivating
One of the core motivations was to avoid biology
Like I felt like they like one of the reasons they avoided a lot of the hunter-gatherer studies
Is not only because they're uncomfortable
With that, you know, like they're scared that it means there's a categorical association between subsistence mode and social form
But I think that also once you get into hunter-gatherer studies, you're
implicitly more or less talking about
Human evolution and I just get a really strong impression. They don't know anything about that stuff that they like
Like don't, you know, because like the way the way that they slightly touch on it makes it
Really seem like they read like a handful of papers or whatever and we're like, we don't like this
So we're just kind of mostly we're like gonna read exactly enough to make fun of it
Very closely in a way that only makes sense to somebody who hasn't read this literature, you know
Um, do you remember the passage you're talking about like where they talk because I don't even remember them talking about biology at all
There's where do they talk about that? Right? So there's just like right. That's the thing. It's just like it comes up like so
So tangentially and ephemeraly, but like they talk about optimal
They talk about optimal foraging theory, which is like really kind of like not
Not like central to a lot of art, you know, it's like, I mean it's it's there, but it's like it is
It's not that's not so biological
In this well, I mean it is okay. I see what you're talking about. Yeah, that's chapter five
Yeah, there's a whole there's a whole realm of like bio theory about optimal foraging, you know, like cross species stuff, but
I don't know. Um, I mean I
What really I think that really what hit me
Was this sense that, um, like I just think of material conditions as a set of constraints, right?
And that there's like that's it. There's freedom within those constraints to a degree
You know, and which is also how I think about the biology of behavior in general, right? It's like it's not that baffling, you know, there's like
You know, there's literally like infinite things you can still do but there's a lot of rules, you know
there are dynamics governing what happens and uh
Like an example from the foraging from like the foraging data set or whatever is like how in the pacific northwest of north america
There were sedentary hunter-gatherers who developed a lot of hierarchy
And then there's this question of why it's not like there weren't equivalent salmon runs further south
but people didn't really like heavily rely on salmon and uh
And like tended more towards acorns and there's this theory that that was like a conscious choice
to um to like diminish, you know, the extent to which food storage created these dynamics
so that's like that's an example where you can see like
There's a lot of that's grayburn windrush theory. There's a lot of choice, right?
I mean and I read the papers like I read some of those papers about acorns versus salmon
Yeah, it seems pretty legit
It seems like it seems like hard to identify another variable that it was actually choice, but it was choice of
Yeah, go ahead
Yeah, and the papers are at least as far as like at least if the question is how abundant are the salmon
Right like because that's been a thing like those those foragers have been cited in a lot of discussions where it's like
They had this unusually like abundant resource and i'm like
Actually salmon runs are kind of a thing all over the place, you know
Especially like before the last few centuries or whatever
Um and yeah, and it seemed like they like there's a pretty decent chance
I mean, maybe there's some other explanation
But choice actually does seem like a pretty good one
About like what to subsist off of but then that totally constrains the social form, right? So you see this like
So there's always a choice
There's always choice
And I mean, it's there's always choice because you always have the you always have the choice to die
That's the real choice like exactly. That's like, I don't want to
Do this and people kill themselves all the time
But like, you know, I will I hate
Farming salmon so much that I'd rather die
But so if you look at the what they described like the southern people are focusing on acorns and the northern people are
focusing on salmon
Basically this from what I understand and what I've been reading reading in those articles
Is that in the south there's
Part of it is a choice because and that's what optimal foraging theory is about
Because if you choose to focus on salmon and you have all the salmon
The way that you survive the non salmon season is you have to store it and then you have all these salmon reserves
So it's just a magnet for all these other rating raiders to come and steal your salmon and that equals a lot of war
And people will choose
Not to have all be constantly subjected to war because it sucks
So instead they're going to choose to even though acorns suck like making food out of acorns is this hugely labor-intensive process
It sucks your it's a lot of work
The nutrition is not as great, but you don't have to be fighting wars all day long
So that's an optimal forging theory will say
well the amount of death and blood and the you know
They end up doing a lot of numbers which does seem a bit dehumanizing, but
It's just a calculation you make every day like uh going to work sucks
But not going to work sucks more and you could break that down into calories if you want it
You know having free time if I can work 10 hours a week even though i'm hungry
I'm at least getting fed enough that it's worth it and there's a calculation you're making
So the calculation they're making is that being you know, and that's a choice I've made in my whole life, right?
So being attacked is worse than the acorns. So they choose acorns
And is it a yeah, it's definitely a choice
But it's not a choice in the sense that everyone thinks that being attacked sucks
Then there's also stuff that in the south it wouldn't really have been possible to completely subsist in some places on
salmon
But it's only in the only place where maybe it was a choice is in that middle
In the middle of the two regions because and the north they didn't have acorns
So they had no choice
They had to do the salmon they had to deal with the fighting rating
And the way you know that it's not just a choice
Is that and they mention it in the book, but they don't really understand the meaning of it
The the the pacific northwest coast peoples and there's many there's several different cultures like a dozen or whatever
They come from five different language groups totally different language groups
Which means that their founder populations were totally different people from totally different cultures that had nothing in common with each other
Yet they settled down in that area and 800 years later
They all have almost exactly the same social system like you know not to insult anybody
They have all kinds of different traditions and different beliefs, but they're they're all doing potlatches. They're all doing rating
They all have
Chief nobility slaves like that's not a coincidence. That is material conditions
Restricting your choices so much so that people from five absolutely different cultures end up doing the exact same thing
And in the south everybody's doing that kind of acorn economy and that kind of austere
Uh Protestant sort of epic now in the middle
Maybe there was a choice
But the stuff that i'm reading is just which which makes sense in for in optimal forging theory too because it's like what I said
Well when it's 20 when it's room temperature, I have a choice of whatever I can wear
You know, so maybe it's one of those conditions
but I was also reading stuff about how
Basically the choice was just be rated or not like, you know, nobody wants to be rated
so
It's better to do acorns like they had the choice because they actually had the acorns and the salmon
But acorns is just a better choice if you don't want to be killed
Maybe somebody else some with some other background might have chosen the the war
who knows
Well friends at this point in the conversation things became horribly distorted for some reason we don't understand
And so there's a few minutes that sound sort of like experimental music where
We have a charming conversation in which we kind of like describe these three camps
of like
Unintegrated sort of over emphasis on one tendency or another within the analysis of
You know the broad trajectory of the human adventure that we're talking about the the post modern camp in which
Uh material conditions just kind of don't matter a sort of hyper
reductive materialism
And then we we dub Graeber and when grows paradigm in consequentialism, which gave us both a laugh
Anyway, you're gonna have to miss all that
But then we you know started another zoom call and the audio was fine
So there is a part two in which we discuss many more fascinating things
Coming very soon in the meantime, please do check out if you have not already
Daniel's podcast what is politics links to both the video and audio versions in the description of this episode
Talk again soon