Title: A Body With Many Selves
Episode #: 90
Episode ID: 17708202
Source: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/17708202-a-body-with-many-selves.mp3
------------------------------------------------------------

=== EPISODE METADATA ===
Generated: 2026-01-12 01:02:05
Episode ID: 10140522
MP3 File: 10140522-philosophy-or-schizophrenia.mp3
Title: Philosophy or Schizophrenia?
Podcast/Artist: Against the Internet
Album/Series: Fight Like An Animal
Source URL: https://www.buzzsprout.com/1052548/episodes/10140522-philosophy-or-schizophrenia.mp3
========================
What if we had complete freedom to test new body invasive technologies on real people?
Since the dawn of science, direct technology testing on real individuals has been an ethical nightmare.
This was a problem for ancient physicists and doctors, and it's now a problem for modern scientists.
However, this doesn't seem like it's going to be a problem for Elon Musk.
We're complaining about apparently having things, finding things inside their bodies
like implants and bits of technology.
What if we had complete freedom to test new body invasive technologies on real people?
Substance dualism comes from that there are two different many other ways, but just to kind of
summarize what the problem is that he sets up is he argues that the human person is essentially
these two different substances, two very different substances, completely different substances,
which is where the term substance dualism comes from, that there are two different kinds of
substances. One is a mental substance and the other is a physical substance.
And these two kinds of substances we make it up to you.
Greetings friends. I'm Arnold Schroeder. This is Fight Like an Animal, and I'm back on that old
mic. Apologies if you noticed over the course of the last few episodes, the episodes that
comprise what I call my surgery phase. There was a lot of like digital artifacting and
weird EQ. I was really just not possessed of the wherewithal to go over to my house and grab
my audio interface and my other mic. Anyway, if you want to find episode bibliographies,
check out againsttheinternet.com, where you can also find my contact information.
Please write to me. Tell me about what I should read next. I've been relying for
a few episodes now on the master and his emissary, the divided brain and the making of the western world
by Ian McGillchrist, which was recommended to me. And finally, if you want to help me hold a candle
to the darkness for a little while longer and say, someday, but not today, motherfucker,
not today, please find me on patreon.com slash biological singularity.
Okay, I might cut this out. If it just feels like it distracts too much from what I'm trying to do
and toss it into some future episode into the next episode, I suppose,
the I want to try to tell some just terrible stories. And I'm going to admit that the stories
are, you know, only really partially there. And that's that's why I'm a little conflicted
about whether it works and makes sense to do in this episode or in the next.
The stories really they're there to illustrate some cool interesting aspects of brain science
that I'm trying to talk about today. But they're really also intended to induce like an empathetic
reaction. And the reason that I want to do that is because I want to kind of illustrate
the process of grappling with these experiences and healing. And I want to talk about what that was
like in the next episode, right? So that's the that's the uncertainty. But here's the terrible
stories. I'll give it a shot and edit them out if I don't like it. These are these are a story
respectively of fracture and of freeze, which are these dominant themes of left hemisphere
processing of subdivision and stasis that we've been talking about. If I decided not to keep
calling it a series, I wanted to do a bunch of episodes that relied on McGill Christ's
The Master and His Emissary or at least heavily referenced it. And I just started to feel like
it would get too cumbersome for it to all be one series. But this is a continuation of
what I was talking about in the Life is Holy War episodes. So it's possible that it won't be
optimal to listen to these without having referenced those before. But I will I'll try not to
make it too abrupt and decisive of a schism and too incoherent without context. So okay,
so here we'll start with we'll start with the fracture story, which is that, as I have mentioned
before, on this podcast, from ages two to eight, I grew up in this cult in Southern
California. Well, you know, first, as is so often for some reason, the case with these
scenarios, we had our like semi nomadic phase, right? This is just so before the cult settles down
to like, kind of race along the horrible trajectory towards the bitter end, there is just so often
a semi nomadic phase. Anyway, cult in Southern California. And they were really into, I talked
to a friend of mine once about the kind of stuff I experienced there. And she mentioned
this term of holding therapy. And she said that was like, maybe like a more mainstream thing that
some of what they were doing was derivative of. But, you know, they were really into if a child was
having an emotional reaction to something or doing something they didn't like,
of like, physically subduing them to get them to stop. And so the worst thing that you could
do was to fight back, because, you know, then just awful things would ensue. And for whatever
reason, and, you know, this, this is really actually so fascinating to think about, and
has haunted me my whole life. But like, I don't know why, but for whatever reason, I alone
among, you know, I mean, I think that there were like, there were a lot of kids there,
there were like, you know, some dozens of kids. I was the only one who just consistently never stopped
fighting back. And so I experienced this sort of like feedback loop of amplifying intensifying
consequences for resisting. But you know, but it's but also like it's a feedback loop in the
sense that I also started to really change. And it really, you know, really brought out some
aggression. And so I never, ever, ever, not ever in my childhood went down without a fight.
But I went down an awful lot. And it started with like, you know, at first it would be like if
just like putting me in some kind of holds didn't work, then they would switch to a pain hold.
Um, but then like, there was a straight jacket phase, right, where they were putting me in a
straight jacket. And I would just struggle around in that until I got exhausted. And then, you know,
after some ridiculous period of time of just like laying around in the straight jacket, they'd be
like, all right, you learned your lesson. And then there was a fucking phone booth phase.
Like, this is where it gets really like, a little dreamlike, there was like a totally
like doctor who asks phone booth that they brought in, you know, there's like this two room place that
the kids were supposed to be throughout the day with like, you know, four or five adults. And
yeah, yeah, they brought a phone booth in. And I like, just, you know, I can remember,
I can remember experiencing such rage at being locked in that thing for so long
that my vision turned into a red and white checkerboard, you know, like, I mean, like some
really insane and just like banging on it, which is what, which is just what primates do
when they're locked in something, right? And like, you know, these idiot motherfucking
New Ageers are like, Oh, well, if you just like, you know, orient towards the magical white light
we're constantly babbling about, then you won't have this reaction. And it's like, you know,
it's like primate biology, like, that's what prisons are like, that's what psych wards are
like. And that's what research facilities where they cage monkeys and apes are like,
right. And so, you know, and so I was just in it, I was just in that mode. And then I can remember,
like they had to like pad the phone booth, and then I destroyed the padding and whatever. And then
eventually they built this thing, you know, I guess basically just like kind of like a closet
or whatever, they built it specifically to walk me in it. I spent a lot of time in there.
And the difference between that and what had been happening before was that
there was some pretty significant sensory deprivation involved. Like there was a crack of
light under the door, but it was dark, you know, it was dark in there. And I started to have this
really specific type of experience where I would worry about people being in the darkness with
me. But then I could start to actually really sense their presences, right? I could really feel
how there was like a man, you know, like a threatening presence, standing
like somewhere else in the closet with me. And then, and this is where it gets freaky
and gets into the brain science that I want to talk about. Then I would start to have the
experience of being that entity, as well as myself. And at that point, what terrified me
or bothered me or whatever was not the fact that I was in a dark closet with a threatening
stranger, it was the fact that I was experiencing two consciousnesses at once, right? The fact
that I was two places at once having two sets of observations and orientations to the world and
motivations, it was really, really, really freaky. And I think that there's something there. I
think that our brains actually have more sort of distinct perspectives in them than we're aware of
in our moment-to-moment experience, because our sense of self in an integrated functioning and
you know, psychological environment is a synthesis of those different perspectives.
But that, you know, and it's not necessarily the case that I think that these two
senses of being were like the left and right hemisphere, I also don't rule it out. I do think
that they're kind of distinct sub-personalities and that they are, to some extent, at times
aware of themselves, again, the Life is Holy War episodes. But you know, but that's not,
I don't know, that's not like a part of the theory that I'm particularly attached to. I
think more broadly speaking, I would just say exactly that, that we have distinct motivational
systems and perspectives within us that, you know, can kind of really be thought of as like a whole
lot of distinct sub-personalities, like a lot, you know, and neuroscientists talk about this,
how if we look at different patterns of brain activity, there is something to be said for
the notion that these are different people of different entities. But I do believe because
psychosis is really wrapped up in left hemisphere dominance theme of the episode. I do think that
it's fair to say whatever those two beings were, however, we should best think of them
as emerging from one brain, that the ability to experience the self as so divided like that
was a result of like a sort of left hemisphere imbalance, like the left hemisphere taking
over more, which it has a tendency to do and which, you know, is characteristic of schizophrenia
and other psychotic states. Okay, then here's the other terrible, terrible story. I'll do this
one really concisely, which is just that, you know, when I was like 18, 19, 20, I had this phase of
fallout from the experiences I just described and, you know, others that had this specific
characteristic, you know, I spent like a few years of my adolescence just kind of like
manically walking around cities and like furiously scribbling in journals and reading,
really sort of like had this hyperkinetic quality. And then things started to get really rigid and
feel like increasingly constrained. And I came back to California from Texas when I was 18 years
old and started like staying various, you know, like pieces of land and things like that. And
having these experiences where I was like starting to just freeze up more and more.
And it at first was like something I could kind of work through. And then for a long time,
it really wasn't for for a couple years of my life, it was like this defining feature. And
I just actually spent a whole lot of my time in this state of like this freeze behavior. And it
could literally happen at any moment in the course of my interaction with the world. And then I would
just be there for a while. And sometimes a while was like hours and hours and hours and hours,
you know. And what I was that was it was like really hellish that was really I've been
through a lot of really hard stuff, but that was pretty hard. And hey, like the internal experience
at some point, I mean, I was in and out of the psych ward at that time, too. And doctors were
like, either overtly baffled, like either admitting they had no idea what was going on or just
like hastily diagnosing me with absolutely everything and making it really clear they
didn't know what was going on, even though they weren't saying that. And you know, they were like
putting me in brain scanners and shit that they were like super, super bewildered by it.
You know, and I did say I was like, this is just a result of stuff that happened to me when
I was a kid. But they, you know, they just like could never figure it out. And then
as I went through life and did reading and whatever, at some point, you know, I read about
freeze responses and fear and how in complex PTSD, sometimes people have freeze responses. And I was
like, well, they're very fucking well is it's just actually in the literature that those people
who were locking me up in psych words are supposed to read, but they didn't, you know,
and I was like, okay, so there it is. But it didn't, I wouldn't say that that description,
I mean, I think that description is ultimately true. But it didn't really like,
it didn't describe my experience in a way that, you know, how sometimes there's that thing where
you're like, what is wrong with me? And then you get on the internet or you read a book
and you're like, Oh, that's what's wrong with me that that experience of like, a diagnosis
really like making your experience makes sense, you know, I just never had that with it. And when
I read the master in his emissary, the divided brain in the making of the Western world, I was
like, Oh, my fucking God, that's what was happening. You know, it just really did feel like the,
like, from my understanding of the relationship between the brain hemispheres and the nature
of their processing styles, what feels like was happening was that my left hemisphere was
completely taking over because what I would actually experience in those moments was this sense that I
wanted to arrest time that I literally like that I wanted to stop what I was doing, and that I wanted
to assess my trajectory with greater rigor and kind of prepare myself for the next moment
with like a complete and perfect understanding of all of the preceding conditions, right? You see
where this is going, how this is like, this is literally like how last episode, we were talking
about the philosophy paradoxes that became ascendant and Greece and how McGillchrist characterizes
that as like, you know, the era of Heraclitus is the era of paradox and change and philosophy
and that being the ascendance of the left hemisphere dominant mode of reasoning when
people are suddenly like, well, an arrow can't travel, you know, because subdividing the distances
it has to travel, blah, blah, blah. And all these things that involve like a lot of stasis
and a lot of like insane logic that just kind of doesn't really connect to life or the world
in a very meaningful way and kind of exists on its own terms in an actually pretty destructive
relationship to actual understanding and interaction with the beautiful strange world that we inhabit
and you know, because it would just go on and on and again, it would just have precisely this
feeling of mechanical rigor, this feeling that I just needed to see everything more clearly
and more definitively before I could be allowed to like do the next thing in the sequence of motions.
And so that's the, those are the traps friends, those stories about are about the traps and I
think I'll keep them in here. And then in the next episode, I'll talk about the jailbreak,
I'll talk about the release and on the level of experience. But yeah, this episode, we're going
to talk about that, we're going to talk about getting lost in that style of processing and the
affinity between states of madness and other ostensibly more respectable modes of discourse
and interaction with the world that are central to creating the world that we live in and you
know, central to the power structures that shape it. And we will talk about why the world looks an
awful lot every, every day more and more like how the left hemisphere sees it. And interestingly,
we're only going to kind of touch on it some, but it's going to set us up in this episode to
talk a little, we'll talk a little bit about left authoritarianism. And then I'm going to actually
do an episode called what is left authoritarianism. And but what I what I hope to do with this episode
is to actually kind of just like establish a frame for really meaningfully asking the question if,
if like, left right as much as they empirically exist. And you know, I've spent a lot of
time trying to describe their underlying foundations. So they're going to continue to
characterize situations on some level, and it's good to understand what they are and what they mean.
But if on some level, left, right, reflects exactly the kind of experiential psychological
fracture that one would expect from the very terminology. And if it's actually useful
to use that framing, again, knowing perfectly well that they're going to continue to be left,
right conflicts in societies. But if participating in them essentially is really actually that
strategically cogent, which doesn't, I, I'm not saying if you're a good leftist, that what
I'm talking about is not having the values you have, I'm literally saying is using left, right,
actually that helpful at this point in history. I really don't think it is. And I'm going to try
to make like a pretty serious case for that. But of course, it wouldn't be I mean, what are you
doing if you're just saying we should we should abandon the left, right framing, and you're
not presenting some kind of serious alternate framing. And the framing that I would present
is a politics of wholeness versus a politics of division, a politics of integration versus a
politics of schism and fracture. And that, and yes, I'm aware that making two opposing
political, you know, outlooks where one of them is supposedly not about making schismatic,
you know, perceptions of the world is a little paradoxical, but I'm down with that paradox.
And I ultimately think that the theme of wholeness encompasses egalitarianism.
But now, let's play a little game of who said it, a babbling lunatic,
or esteemed philosopher, Rene Descartes. Okay, so someone, it's either a madman or it's Descartes,
is looking out of a window and seeing men pass in the street. And he says, yet,
do I see any more than hats and coats, which could conceal automatons? I judge that they are men.
Wow. If you guessed Descartes, you guessed right. But do you see my point that if it
wasn't in meditations, and somebody just said that shit to you, you might think, well, this
person has gone a little bit insane. As McGillchrist says, philosophers spend a good deal of time
inspecting and analyzing processes that are usually and perhaps must remain implicit,
unconscious, intuitive. In other words, examining the life of the right hemisphere from the standpoint
of the left. It is perhaps then not surprising that the glue begins to disintegrate. And there is a nasty
cracking noise as the otherwise normally robust sense of the self comes apart, possibly revealing
more about the merits or otherwise of the process than the self under scrutiny. Schizophrenics,
like philosophers, have a problem with the sense of self, which ordinary individuals involved with
living lack. As Wittgenstein once remarked, it's strange that in ordinary life we are not troubled
by the feeling that the phenomena slipping away from us, the constant flux of appearance,
but only when we philosophize. And you know, actually quite a few observers have noted
the convergence of themes in madness, hyper-rational ideologies, and the experiential
qualities of modern life. As McGillchrist also says, there are extensive similarities between
schizophrenia and the state of mind that is brought about. When one makes a conscious effort to
distance oneself from one's surroundings, refrain from normal action and interaction with them,
suspend one's normal assumptions and feelings about them, and subject them to a detached scrutiny.
An exercise which in the non-mental ill is normally confined to philosophers.
The belief that this will result in a deeper apprehension of reality ignores the fact that
the nature of the attention we bring to bear on anything alters what we find there.
Adopting a stance that is normally only found in patients suffering from schizophrenia
is not obviously a recipe for finding a higher truth. But it's what the left hemisphere wants us
to do, right? It's all about abstraction, about disconnection. And so one of the primary ways that
manifests is in trying to disconnect an understanding of experience from experience itself. So we
could say that the right and left hemisphere characteristic modes are like two different
ways of looking at the world, but because worlds and self have this pretty fluid,
interesting dynamic relationship, you know, I think it's interesting to think of
their respective versions of self. One, the right hemisphere is as an infinitely extended self,
and one, the left hemisphere is as an infinitely divided self. And, you know, so the infinitely
extended self would see one as fundamentally continuous with the universe and would specifically
see everything as alive and interconnected. And then the infinitely divided self begins with
this fundamental rupture between self and world, right? And between experience and an understanding
of experience. But then it continues to create further subdivisions within self. The left hemisphere,
left to its own devices, and trying to understand experience ends up establishing this sort of
infinite hierarchy of self reflexivity, right? Where there's a process of evaluation of
experience. And then that begets the need to evaluate the process of evaluation of experience
at infadiation. So the infinitely divided self is like attempting to construct an epistemology
by separation from mental processes and evaluation of them. But obviously that, you know,
that just multiplies the levels of the hierarchy forever. So I would say that according to the
infinitely divided self, nothing is alive. And everything is discrete, bound, and absolutely
self preferential. And as with so many things involving brain science, we know a lot about
what we know of right and left hemisphere differences from injuries. And so in scenarios
of right hemisphere deficiency, we see a bunch of types of reasoning processes of just like
wild disconnection and logic taken on its own terms as a kind of substitute for the experience of
reality that, you know, is once again more characteristic of psychotics and schizophrenics
or urban planners and scientific foresters. So McGillchrist talks about this a little bit in terms
of the left hemisphere's tendency to break things down into static moments, and then to like,
logically analyze the relationship between those static moments, and how when that takes over too
much from a right hemisphere deficit deficit, that people become unrecognizable from minor changes,
you know, like, like literally somebody goes, you know, somebody's wife goes and gets a haircut,
and the right hemisphere deficient patient can't see that it's the same person and believes
that it's a copy or something. He says they may develop the belief that a person they know
very well is actually being represented by an imposter, a condition known after its first
describer as a cap grass syndrome. Small perceptual changes seem to suggest a wholly different entity,
not just a new bit of information that needs to be integrated into the whole.
The significance of the part in this sense outweighs the pull of the whole. And he also
talks about, you know, like the general sort of aesthetic congruence between the hyper technical,
hyper rational delusions of people suffering from various psychotic states and the actual,
you know, world that we live in that these people have made, and how the left hemisphere
with its orientation towards grasping and extraction and utilitarianism
has basically an affinity for everything that's human made and mechanical. He also just says
anything that's, you know, like bizarre or alien or non existent, and that the right hemisphere
has in addition to a much greater sort of like social processing burden,
that it seems to be more oriented towards processing and comprehending life and living things.
So he says it is the left hemisphere alone that codes for non living things.
While both hemispheres code for living things, perhaps because the living can be seen as
independent individuals, right hemisphere, or as objects of use pray things and so on,
left hemisphere. However, at least one study has found a clean divide between the hemispheres,
the left coding for the non living, and the right for the living, regardless of the task.
Another study concluded that there are different brain networks subserving the
identification of living and non living entities. And so yeah, I mean, if you if
you're like, but you know, I don't have enough of the hell world outside my window,
what is it like to inhabit the experience of somebody who would make such a thing?
You could always smoke a bunch of meth. And wouldn't it be wild if I got an email from
somebody who was like, Hey, I smoked meth for a few months, and I really see what you're
talking about with the left hemisphere dominant stuff. But, you know, but seriously,
like people think that like a lot of different psychotic states, including those induced by
drugs like methamphetamine, are these descents into utter irrationality. And that's exactly
not the case. They're actually descents into hyper rationality. And it's utter hell, right?
Like when people are at the place where they know that the person that they can see out the
window is giving signs to the person who operates the machine that's controlling their mind or
whatever. That is the result of like a month's long reasoning process, right? Like that is
the result of some late nights and some hard work. And it just has this very specific quality
of epistemology building, where you're trying to get the self reference and the assumptions
out of the system. And, you know, and you're basically asking yourself the question, how do I know
what I know? The answer is you don't, you don't. And you're never going to. And you just actually
have to live in the embodied world where you simply know things. And there really just
is a starting point to understanding anything that you get for free and that you never get
to break down rationally because it just doesn't work. And because we live in a world that is actually
fundamentally mysterious. And this is why mathematicians and physicists and whatnot who have pursued
certain lines of reasoning to a great extent have found themselves at the brink of madness
and have either had to, in the mode of, you know, in the mode of chordal retreat and say the universe
is mysterious or in the mode of cantor, you know, just go over that precipice into total madness
and annihilation. If you want a great book that's about exactly that, check out the mystery of
the aleph, mathematics, the cabala and the search for infinity. It's sort of about cantor more than
girdle, but talks about that that difference between them about them, you know, respectively being
destroyed and not being destroyed by essentially the same problem. Okay, and then to my
extraordinary pleasure, we are going to bring in some old Portland action into this episode
in the form of out of control zine number one by David Drexler. This is a very like
Portland 2005 kind of thing. People were so obsessed with this work, my copies of out of
control were made by Drexler's former housemate who just photocopied them because he was like
this is amazing and needs to be everywhere. And then there were definitely like photocopies of
photocopies circulated for a long time and we were all just utterly obsessed with it.
So he wrote one called technophobic delusions in schizophrenia, the intrusion of schizoid thought
into the consensus reality. He says, I suggest that there is a parallel development between
technology and mental illness, which began with Descartes 17th century conception of the
universe and all beings in it as clockwork mechanisms. A belief that one is dead or is a
remote controlled mechanism is commonly reported in schizophrenics. There is observable a certain
mania for vivisection or the experimental cutting up of animals among scientists and doctors,
which is analogous to the childhood murder of cats and small animals so often noted among
those who later become psychopaths or mass murderers. The incredible explosion of the formerly obscure
and undescribed illness termed autism may also be a part of this process. The autistic are often said
to react to people as objects be rational, hyper scientific and unable to deal with human
relationships. In an interesting example of feedback or the circular influence between
mental states and external reality, the autism epidemic may be caused by environmental factors
consequent on the prevalence of technology itself. Technology, a mindless viral force,
may be actively breeding humans especially adapted to minister to reproduce and exalt it.
So for example they might feel that they're getting thoughts put into their head
that aren't their own. Had any experiences like that?
Yeah I do think things that aren't made like to put in stuff in my brain it's not
me it's not I'm not thinking. So it's a different thoughts in your brain?
Yeah it's not that the physical world was basically just a machine that got created and this
soul substance was in some ways just kind of a a separate thing infused into this otherwise
just purely mechanical world that was in the human person. So a way to you know show this impact
in his thought for example is to look at how he looked at animals. So he basically viewed
animals as machines that they had no unconsciousness at all which I think is a very strange view.
And so in Descartes view then animals don't have souls, humans have souls.
Okay that was the master himself David Drexler and when he wasn't indulging in a little lunatic
babbling about hats walking down the street without people wearing them Descartes could
sometimes be found making authoritative proclamations of complete gibberish lacking
any foundation in empirical reality whatsoever about the physiology of laughter. He said laughter
results when the blood coming from the right hand cavity of the heart through the central
arterial vein causes the lungs to swell up suddenly and repeatedly forcing the air they
contain to rush out through the windpipe where it forms an inarticulate explosive sound.
As the air is expelled the lungs are swollen so much that they push against all the muscles of the
diaphragm chest and throat thus causing movement in the facial muscles with which these organs are
connected. And it is just this facial expression together with the inarticulate and explosive
sound that we call laughter and there are a number of features worth pointing out about this
passage and you know the extreme left hemisphere dominance that it exhibits the obvious sort of
like disconnection from the body and then the need to kind of really like disavow and distance
oneself you know like the description of laughter that that really seems to border on contempt and
disgust but also the fact that none of this is true that this is a hyper technical description
that Descartes is just making up I mean he's just making it up right so again there's this
tendency of the left hemisphere to think in terms of hyper technicality and axiomatic rigor
but to kind of get very lost and to end up coming to conclusions that seem to have been decisively
proved that are actually manifest the insane and then the the other thing that is worth noting
that is characteristic of left hemisphere dominance whether you know it's a psychiatrist
or a psychotic is this strange sort of like detached superiority this this sense of of
you know telling people who are involved in the you know the the trivial stupid reality of living
life what their lives are actually actually consist of you know underneath their perceptions
what's really there as McGill Christ says what's striking here is not just the sense of disgust
the deliberately disengaged mechanical attitude taken by Descartes in this anatomy of hilarity
it's that his authoritative manner is not in any way inhibited by the fact that actually he had
no idea what he was talking about his anatomy is a complete work of fantasy but laughter was to be
put in its place because it was spontaneous intuitive and unwilled and represented the triumph
of the body and yeah so McGill Christ talks about about exactly that how you know like the
nature of attention so such a good way to characterize the difference in the processing
styles of the right and left brain hemispheres with the right giving a more open broad like
less acutely focused attention and the left like a very you know a very focused like direct
mechanical scrutiny and how that shows up in a bunch of different places you know mental illness
and systems of power in the society that we live in and so he ends up like uniting all of these
pretty interesting and supposedly disparate phenomena into you know into like this one analytical
framework this is the amazing thing about McGill Christ like the the uh David Drexler quote that
I just read Drexler doesn't talk about right and left brain hemispheres like I don't think that he
necessarily had ever assimilated a bunch of that science but he talks about so many of the same
differences in perceptual style he really like you know it's just a striking uncanny degree
ends up citing the same sources and looking at the same patterns you know like that thing of
talking about subdivision as somehow like really central to the mechanical mode of thinking and
and the cart and you know like there's a high level of convergence and that's what's so fun
about doing McGill Christ I feel like I could do so many of this kind of episode where I think
there's a lot of different texts and whatever else that are talking about what he's talking about
in a somewhat more oblique fashion and he just really got in like he got like all the way in there
you know and it's like it's it's pretty fun to hear him talk about Heidecker or whatever and be
like oh yeah like that's a lot of work and there's maybe a way to understand it that's
actually pretty concise and you know and like there's a bunch of things that I could do in
terms of the master and his emissary but yeah so he talks about how this sort of like this
emotionally inappropriate or emotionally disengaged like mode of detached scrutiny is something that
you know again is like characteristic of psychotics you're right like think of a psychotic state
you know like that like the emotional and appropriateness detached part you know like
if somebody was like oh are you scared does that scare you are you oh you're scared now
is that bad you know and it was like clear that they weren't participating in that emotional
process but right you know or a psychiatrist being like here you know like tell me about
your feelings like I'm going to give you a detached interpretation of them or or a state
planner or whoever right all of these people you know engaged in these like supposedly hyper
rational processes of detached scrutiny of the people around them and you know and telling them
how it really is telling them what's really going on and one of the fascinating domains
that that McGill Crest unites in this manner is or two domains is a the like post-modern
scene and like hyper scientific rationalism or like particularly like what people call
scientism right you know just like the overstating I think that's how it's pronounced the
overstating of the degree of knowledge we have about the world through science or the
certainty we have of that knowledge and that that both you know that that post-modernism
is characteristically wrapped up in what he calls the hidden message axiom or you know he says it
essentially has the status of an axiom in critical theory and whatnot of you know of
like taking apart a behavior a text whatever a movie you know a social situation and
and telling us what it really means what's what's really happening you know like engaging in this
mechanical dissection and and how there is such you know that that the emotional tone of it the
that just kind of like the apparent motivating framework that that comes through in those
texts is this one of detached superiority it's this one of of telling people you know like
what their art means because they don't know and things like that and then you know obviously
like an over an overstated certainty about what we know through science or how certain we are
that we know it is again you know a on the emotional signature that it has is the same
like detached scrutiny and superiority and telling people how things really are
um with you know again this absolute certainty um but the problem is is that you know if you ever
read some some theory of that nature and you're like I think they maybe just don't really have
anything to say at all and aren't onto anything or you know if you've ever had a psychiatrist
tell you you were depressed because of a deficiency in neurotransmitters in your brain or whatever
like the thing with that mode is that it people really tend to like really really a lot of the
time to state with absolute certainty something um when they have absolutely no idea what they're
talking about so the left hemisphere specializes in abstraction right it specializes in
taking things out of their context and dividing things um and uh one very simple way to think
about that is that abstraction is literally equivalent to not seeing something it's it's
equivalent to not being aware of the total reality that's what it is um but we we value it
and it's it's useful and so to think abstractly is often not you know it like sounds smart or
whatever but the more abstract you are the more you're just actually forced not to see definitionally
of the reality to which you ostensibly refer and so you know if you do it right maybe
maybe you can go up tons of levels of abstraction and still be accurately describing
something all the way back down there on the ground but you never know um McGillchrist says
since what we select to attend to is guided by our expectations of what it is we are going to see
there is a circularity involved which means we experience more and more only what we already
know right the left hemisphere builds systems it builds models but the problem with that
is that you can get stuck in a model he says denial is a left hemisphere specialty in states of
relative right hemisphere inactivation in which there is therefore a bias toward the left hemisphere
subjects tend to evaluate themselves optimistically view pictures more positively and are more apt
to stick to their existing point of view in the presence of a right hemisphere stroke the
left hemisphere is crippled by naively optimistic forecasting of outcomes it is always a winner
winning is associated with activation of the left amygdala losing with right amygdala activation
right so the left hemisphere has like at the at the level of like emotional tone or quality
like a sort of like it literally sees the world brighter and has a lot more of a like
you know uh an emotional propensity to be like you know the model is working the model is definitely
working no matter what it's real you know no matter how much it seems to be kind of conflicting
with reality the model definitely is valid and one of the fascinating examples he gives of this
again this reality that we know a lot about we know from brains when from when they get injured
um but he talks about how in cases of right hemisphere deficiency the left arm won't be able
to move and um the the left brain has so much trouble accepting that there is something out
of its control especially something that involves the body that people who are suffering from right
hemisphere damage with a paralyzed left arm will uh deny that the arm is theirs like like they'll
talk about how there's an arm lying next to them in their bed and stuff like that um he quotes a
doctor in the most extreme cases a patient will not only deny that the arm or leg is paralyzed
but assert that the arm lying in the bed next to him his own paralyzed arm doesn't
belong to him there's an unbridled willingness to accept absurd ideas a little later on uh same
doctor the left hemisphere is a conformist largely indifferent to discrepancies whereas the right
hemisphere is the opposite highly sensitive to perturbation and then mcgill christ himself
denial a tendency to conformism a willingness to disregard evidence a habit of ducking
responsibility a blindness to mere experience in the face of the overwhelming evidence of theory
these might sound ominously familiar to observers of contemporary western life and indeed they do
friends this sounds very much like the mindset of the people who have power in and created this
society um and so here is where we get to mash up yin mcgill christ's brilliant the master in his
emissary the divided brain in the making of the western world with james c scott's brilliant
seeing like a state how certain schemes to improve the human condition have failed scott seeing like
a state is essentially a psychological work it is about the state of perception that
characterizes the people who built the modern state in which the world is reduced for the sake
of legibility in the service of utilization to abstract static categories he says certain forms
of knowledge and control require a narrowing of vision the great advantage of such tunnel vision
is that it brings into sharp focus certain limited aspects of an otherwise far more complex and
unwieldy reality this very simplification in turn makes the phenomenon at the center of the field
of vision more legible and hence more susceptible to careful measurement and calculation combined
with similar observations an overall aggregate synoptic view of a selective reality is achieved
making possible a high degree of schematic knowledge control and manipulation
mcgill christ the right hemisphere tends to present the world realistically with visual
detail and in three dimensions with depth and an aesthetic sense of the intensity and beauty
of visual representations comes largely from the right hemisphere the right hemisphere represents
objects as having volume and depth and space as they are experienced the left hemisphere tends to
represent the visual world schematically abstractly geometrically with a lack of realistic detail
and even in one plane drawings of buildings and individuals with an inactivated right hemisphere
may even be laid out flat with all facades simultaneously visible as in a child's drawing
one way of putting this is that the left hemisphere is concerned with what it
knows where the right hemisphere is concerned with what it experiences james scott no administrative
system is capable of representing any existing social community except through a heroic and
greatly schematized process of abstraction and simplification it is not simply a question
of capacity although like a forest a human community is surely far too complicated and
variable to easily yield its secrets to bureaucratic formulae and it is also a question of purpose
state agents have no interest nor should they and describing an entire social reality any more than
the scientific forester has an interest in describing the ecology of a forest in detail
their abstractions and simplifications are disciplined by a small number of objectives
and until the 19th century the most prominent of these were simply taxation
political control and conscription they needed only the techniques and understandings
that were adequate to these tasks okay so scott begins his book with a description of the
development of scientific forestry in the 18th century in state fiscal forestry however
the actual tree with its vast number of possible uses was replaced by an abstract tree
representing a volume of lumber or firewood if the princely conception of the forest was still
utilitarian it was surely a utilitarianism confined to the direct needs of the state
from a naturalist perspective nearly everything was missing from the state's narrow frame of
reference gone was the vast majority of the flora grasses flowers lichens ferns mosses shrubs
and vines gone two were reptiles birds amphibians and innumerable species of insects gone were
most species of fauna except those that interested the crowns gamekeepers this kind of abstracting
utilitarian logic that the state through its officials applied to the forest is not entirely
distinctive what is distinctive about this logic however is the narrowness of its field of vision
the degree of elaboration to which it can be subjected and above all as we shall see the
degree to which it allowed the state to impose the logic on the very reality that was observed
and that is the key theme is the the feedback the notion that the left hemisphere builds
abstract models but then instantiates in them in the world which then feeds back on its tendency
to build models that idea that the the world we see is an exteriorization of the left
hemisphere's type of processing and in particular you know it's this nightmare world of straight
lines and there are straight lines found in two places in nature the horizon appears to be a
straight line and some really flat landscapes even though you know it's not and there's straight
lines in the human mind and then it really is you know like this is like there's this level
of this that I don't know it's what the left hemisphere does is just draw lines to you know
it it's about extracting things and dividing things and the world we live in now is just this whole
insane fucking wilderness of 90 degree angles that are just it's something we we so take for
granted we take it we take it so for granted and it's it's not I mean it changes our brains
I've talked on other episodes about the Mueller liar illusion which comes from living in a world
of 90 degree angles and it's not an illusion that people in traditional societies are subject to
but yeah like I don't think we have a subjective sense because it's the waters in which we have
always swum how the alien to what in other scenarios might be described as basic human
sensibilities this environment we live in is to get a sense of it here's a little black elk
after the heyoka ceremony I came to live here where I am now between wounded knee creek and
grass creek others came to and we made these little gray houses of logs that you see
and they are square it is a bad way to live for there can be no power in a square
you've noticed that everything an indian does is in a circle and that is because the power
of the world always works in circles and everything tries to be round in the old days
when we were a strong and happy people all our power came to us from the sacred hoop of the
nation and so long as the hoop was unbroken the people flourished the flowering tree was the living
center of the hoop and the circle of the four quarters nourished it the east gave peace and light
the south gave warmth the west gave rain and the north with its cold and mighty wind gave
strength and endurance this knowledge came to us from the outer world with our religion
everything the power of the world does is done in a circle the sky is round and I have heard that
the earth is round like a ball and so are all the stars the wind in its greatest power whirls
birds make their nests in circles for theirs is the same religion as ours the sun comes
forth and goes down in a circle the moon does the same and both are round even the seasons
form a great circle and they're changing and always come back again to where they were the
life of a man is a circle from childhood to childhood and so it is and everything where
power moves our tepees were round like the nests of birds and these were always set in a
circle the nation's hoop and nest of many nests where the great spirit meant for us to hatch
our children but the waissu choose have put us in these square boxes our power is gone and we are
dying for the power is not in us anymore so mcgillchrist talks about how you know the left
hemisphere's mode is the mode of the line and the right hemisphere's mode is the mode of the
circle by contrast the shape that is suggested by the processing of the right hemisphere
is that of the circle and its movements is characteristically in the round the phrase we
used to describe something that is seen as a hole and in depth circular emotion accommodates as
rectilinearity does not the coming together of opposites cognition in the right hemisphere is
not a process of something coming into being through adding piece to piece in a sequence
but of something that is out of focus coming into focus as a whole everything is understood
within its pen number of significances in its context all that encircles it there are strong
affinities between the idea of wholeness and roundness the images of movement within stasis
and of stasis within movement are reflected in the circle as they are in the movement of water
ever flowing and ever the same and in the stars that circle and always return
so yeah i mean one of the fascinating things about mcgill christ's work is you know this this
notion that these processing styles are describing themselves over and over again in all of these
different cultural materials and that there are these occasions where there's some degree to
which the the self conceptualization becomes rather explicit and you know people conceive of
themselves as a divided being or there seems to be some kind of actual conflict between the left
and right brain hemispheres and the left and right sides of the body and one that i would
note that that i'm adding to you know the materials that he's characterized as such would be the work
of jg ballard you know his fiction so often had these like kind of insanely recurrent like obsessively
recurrent little like themes and moments or even kind of like turns of phrase and stuff and one
that he he would just hit over and over again was talking about human built environments as the
exteriorization of a disturbed mental state and i think that is the world that we live in it's
it's an exteriorization of a pretty unhinged state of left hemisphere dominated you know
hyper rational dissection of everything like like what is characteristic of of this environment we've
built is just all of these lines like of just like everything getting infinitely subdivided
through all of these straight lines that we've just put everywhere in the world and that's
certainly how uh how drexler sees it he says the schizophrenic fantasy of the influencing machine
should be considered a parallel to the influence of technology in the cartesian mechanistic world view
on consciousness in tracing the congruent histories of technology and schizophrenia we can observe
a curious interplay between them in which delusions appear among the insane before
manifesting in or intruding into the consensus reality the current state of the industrialized
world with its ubiquitous wireless devices televisions ctv surveillance microchip
trafficking etc could well be seen as a flourishing garden of schizoid delusions erupted into
reality indeed when cell phones first became common many commentators rightly noted that
someone using such a device was frequently indistinguishable from a lunatic seen in this context
that observation is extremely meaningful the history of technological progress is well known
but its parallels in mental illness are largely hidden and unrecognized and yet so what what
he gets into is the fact that a lot of the technologies that emerged in the the 19th and
20th centuries you know like telegraph lines and things like and like radios and things like that
were actually described first in the delusions of paranoid psychotic patients in psychiatric
institutions that they would describe things that perfectly corresponded to you know like radios
and microchips and it just it just like our whole technosphere before those things were
ever invented and that would be an awfully you know compelling argument for this notion
that those technologies actually just are an exteriorization of mental processes that's you
know are characteristic of schizophrenia and other disturbed states so yeah i love that scott
started his book with a description of the development of scientific forestry because
i've lived in that world for a whole long time you know i used to do a lot of federal lands
timber sale appeals and so i read a lot of the insane nonsense about you know like the insane
abstractions to which people reduced forests and saw how it just really like didn't work but but
also you know of course that reality that um that they created these landscapes of death
at 90 degree angles that they took forests and you know and clear cut them and then there would be
you know it would be this imposition of these linear you know these linear structures of
devastation on on some mountains of of forest that had no straight lines anywhere in them
um you know but but they would do stuff like uh all forest service i know this is some old
man shit to say but like all forest service logging after um the northern spotted owl um
in caused the development of the northwest forest plan and like really significantly shifted
the way that logging was done on federal public lands um all forest service logging
was predicated on reducing wildfire hazard and you know it's like supposedly like
benefiting the forest in all these ways um and they would use these uh fire behavior models
that were derived from a set of experimental observations like a very small set of
experimental observations that happened in boreal forests in canada in the 70s you know and so they
would like you know it's like one model would feed into the other to be like a model for
flame height of a ground fire right you know and it would take variables
as course of metrics as like the tons per acre of trees on the ground and that were like you know
above and below three inches in diameter or whatever it's like you know like things like that and then
you know so like as an example of how this didn't work i mean it didn't work in the sense that
these like fuel treatment areas burned way worse than areas that didn't get logged but um you know
that that would be like the real right hemisphere way to say that it just didn't work in the world
but uh you know another way to point it out in terms of the model a little more i guess is uh
one of the variables in the fire behavior models was crown like average crown base height
of trees right so like the distance from the ground uh where the branches start uh because
that matters in terms of whether fires jump up off the ground into the canopies of trees and then
you know i can spread canopy to canopy those are like a different kind of fire um you know but
it's like this average and so they'd say like we're gonna go out and cut down all the trees
that are below you know say like 24 inches in diameter um and uh that they're trunks right you
know and and that should raise the average crown base height to whatever they estimated and you
know that'll keep a fire like we've done the modeling you know it's that it's that absolute
certainty about what we know and uh and how certain we are of that knowledge uh you know
they'd be like we've done the modeling the the inexorable logic of the model states that that
will prevent fires from getting into the crowns and you could just like go look at the place they
were gonna log and see that there's massive variation that trees just don't know about
these laws that exist in these models that if they're like a certain diameter their branches
have to be a certain distance from the ground you know it's just not real it's not if you've
ever seen some trees you know that's not a thing and uh and so you could just like go look at
the places they're gonna log and see plenty of trees that exceeded those size classes those
diameters that had branches that were just like all the way down on the ground um you know so it's
like that level of just total of like so those are the characteristics right of logging is like
the imposition of a nightmare landscape of devastation according to you know 90 degree angles
but then also just like seeing the forest as a set of hyper abstract like idealized objects
and relationships that just doesn't really account for what's actually happening it's like you know and
then like McGillchrist talks about um and when he's making the case that the ascendance of the left
hemisphere can be seen in the you know that one of the cultural phases because he makes this case
that there's perturbations back and forth as one would expect for two opponent processors
in such a you know dynamic um acute balance of power but one of the cases for left hemisphere
dominance he makes is the ascendance of you know Plato and Aristotle and Greek philosophy
as opposed to people like Heraclitus and you know he talks about how Plato literally said that
objects were like not the right you know thing to observe and that what really mattered
were these ostensible archetypes that these like non-existent meta objects you know that lived in
his left hemisphere um and he also said he said something absolutely insane about astronomy
and about how one should not look to the visible stars to understand the motions of the heavens
or something right you know like again like literally asserting the primacy of the model of the
sky against the fucking sky and the stars right and it's definitely the nature of scientific
forestry is to assert the primacy of the model of the forest against the forest and then you
know it always has this this quality again this left hemisphere seeing the world literally more
lightly and being more optimistic and its assessments of itself and its own abilities
it always had this quality like in environmental impact statements and the propaganda of timber
companies this like cheerful description of the nightmare world that they've created you
know like like asserting like oh like we have these these scientific tools of forestry so even though
when you look and see dying mountains and choking rivers you know we know because the models say
that we've created something wonderful like you know when the logic overtakes the reality
as McGill Christ says failure to take into account context inability to understand
gestalt forms an inappropriate demand for precision when none can be found in ignorance of process
which becomes a never-ending series of static moments these are signs of left hemisphere
predominance and a little later paradox means literally a finding that is contrary to receive
opinion or expectation that immediately alerts us since the purveyor of received opinion and expectation
is the left hemisphere i called it a sign that our ordinary ways of thinking those of the left
hemisphere are not adequate to the nature of reality but wait here it seems that the left
hemisphere with its reliance on the application of logic is stating the opposite that it is
reality that is inadequate to our ordinary ways of thinking contrary to received opinion it asserts
arrows do not move achilles cannot overtake the tortoise there can never be a heap of sand
theses his ship is not really a ship after all empamanides was inevitably talking nonsense
in other words its understanding of paradox is not that there must be problems in applying this
kind of logic to the real world but that the real world isn't the way we think it is because logic
says so this looks like an interesting usurpation a swapping of roles with a new dispensation
we're defining who is master and who is emissary you're gonna think it sounds two people
my housemates are working for mi-5 that he thought that the physical world was basically just a
machine that got created and this soul substance was in some ways just kind of a a separate thing
infused into this otherwise just purely mechanical world what if we had complete freedom to test
a new body invasive technologies on real people mechanical world purely mechanical world purely
mechanical world purely mechanical world and so scott makes the point that this type of this
type of perception of the world this cheerful description of the nightmare world
um you know the insistence that it must not be a nightmare because the the model the the perfect
scientific understanding of society or whatever says so uh so he says the great simplification
of the forest into a one commodity machine was precisely the step that allowed german forest
science to become a rigorous technical and commercial discipline that could be codified and taught
the condition of its rigor was that it severely bracketed or assumed to be constant all variables
except those bearing directly on the yield of the selected species and on the cost of growing
and extracting them as we shall see with urban planning revolutionary theory collectivization
and rural resettlement a whole world lying outside the brackets returned to taunt this technical vision
and scott identifies the unitary ideology underlying these supposedly disparate phenomena
as authoritarian high modernism which really one has to give some accolades for the term of
phrase and i know there was some dialogue recently about how james scott as an anthropologist
worked for a cia for the cia and people were disappointed and confused or whatever my understanding
has always been that he's you know just like a professor with pretty i don't know fairly conventional
like liberal views who just studies what he studies anyway but you got to give the man
some credit uh whatever monstrous whatever monstrous behavior he's engaged in for the
term of phrase authoritarian high modernism he says i believe that many of the most tragic
episodes of state development in the late 19th and 20th centuries originate in a particularly
pernicious combination of three elements the first is the aspiration to the administrative
ordering of nature and society an aspiration that we've already seen at work in scientific
forestry but one raised to a far more comprehensive and ambitious level high
modernism seems an appropriate term for this aspiration as a faith it was shared by many
across a wide spectrum of political ideologies its main carriers and exponents were the avant
garde among engineers planners technocrats high level administrators architects scientists and
visionaries if one were to imagine a pantheon or hall of fame of high modernist figures
it would almost certainly include such names as Henry Conte de Saint Simone de Corbusée Walter
Renthau Robert McNamara Robert Moses Jean Monet the Shah of Iran David Lilienthal Vladimir Lennon
Leon Trotsky and Julius Nierere they envisioned a sweeping rational engineering of all aspects
of social life in order to improve the human condition as a conviction the high modernism
was not the exclusive property of any political tendency it had both right and left wing variants
as we shall see the second element is the unrestrained use of the power of the modern state
as an instrument for achieving these designs the third element is a weakened or prostrate
civil society that lacks the capacity to resist these plans the ideology of high modernism provides
as it were the desire the modern state provides the means of acting on that desire and the
incapacitated civil society provides the leveled terrain on which to build dysutopias we shall
return shortly to the premises of high modernism but here it is important to note that many of
the great state-sponsored calamities of the 20th century have been the work of rulers with grandiose
and utopian plans for their society one can identify high modernist utopianism of the right
of which Nazism is truly the diagnostic example the massive social engineering under apartheid
in South Africa the modernization plans of the Shah of Iran villageization in Vietnam
and huge late colonial development schemes for example the Ghazira scheme in Sudan should be
considered under this rubric and yet there is no denying that much of the massive state enforced
social engineering of the 20th century has been the work of progressive often revolutionary elites
why the answer I believe lies in the fact that it is typically progressives who have come to
power with a comprehensive critique of existing society in a popular mandate at least initially
to transform it these progressives have wanted to use that power to bring about
enormous changes in people's habits work living patterns moral conduct and worldview
so scott goes on a bunch of different journeys in this book but by far the funniest the most
gratifying if you're the kind of person who just really enjoys descriptions of how completely insane
and broken those who have power in shaping our society actually are you know it's the
the one that's most gratifying if you're like that is definitely scott's description of the
corbusé le corbusé embraced the huge machine age hierarchical centralized city with a vengeance
if one were looking for a caricature a kernel blimp as it were of modernist urbanism one could
hardly do better than to invent le corbusé his views were extreme but influential and they were
representative in the sense that they celebrated the logic implicit in high modernism in his
daring his brilliance and his consistency le corbusé cast the high modernist faith and sharp relief
and it should be noted that he was really fond of talking about cities as
environments to accommodate machines you know and just used all of this i mean le corbusé's
rhetoric is hilarious but you know like like literally saying like we will build like you
know these plans for this city will be like the first instance of a city built on behalf of machines
and uh you know he wrote a pamphlet called towards a machine age paris just so you know
that that left hemisphere affinity for all things mechanical um and really so much of what he did was
wrapped up in this uh this kind of like god's eye view as migill christ calls it you know this
this like very abstract like seen from a great distance highly schematized um you know
version of a city consisting of simplified geometric shapes basically um but there is
really something in the left hemisphere mode that wants to literally like ascend and be like
way above a situation and to be able to evaluate it um you know like comprehend it in entirety which
never really works out but which leads to a lot of schematization uh so migill christ talks a lot
about the love of uh many psychotics of drawing disembodied eyes of uh you know like creating
drawings of some scene but then adding a disembodied eye that's like surveying all of it from the flat
plane of like the implicit sky on the on the paper or whatever um and he talks a lot about the
the left hemisphere's desire to make everything a visual schema and to see it from nowhere in
particular but to believe that it's from everywhere he says as lewis sass has demonstrated in relation
to the world of the schizophrenic solipsistic subjectivity on the one hand with its fantasy of
omnipotence and alienated objectivity on the other with its related fantasy of impotence
tend to collapse into one another and are merely facets of the same phenomenon both imply
isolation rather than connection the attempt to adopt a god's eye view or view from nowhere and
thomas naked's famous phrase the position pretended in its consequences the position
pretended by objectivism is as empty as solipsism and is ultimately indistinguishable from it in
its consequences the view from nowhere pretends to equate to a view from everywhere what is
different is the view from somewhere everything that we can know can be known only from an
individual point of view or under one or another aspect of its existence never in totality or
perfection so le Corbusier really you know seemed to have this overwhelming psychological need
to design cities that met his desire for visual uniformity at great distances
le Corbusier had no patience for the physical environment that centuries of urban living
had created he heaped scorn on the tangle darkness and disorder the crowded and pestilential conditions
of paris and other european cities at the turn of the century part of his scorn was as we shall see
on functional and scientific grounds a city that was to become efficient and healthful would
indeed have had to demolish much of what it had inherited but another source of his
scorn was aesthetic he was visually offended by disarray and confusion in the disorder he
wished to correct was not so much a disorder at ground level but a disorder that was a function
of distance a bird's eye view his mixed motives are nicely captured in his judgment on small
rural properties as seen from the air from airplanes it looked down on infinitely subdivided
incongruously shaped plots of land the more modern machinery develops the more land is
chopped up into tiny holdings that render the miraculous promise of machinery useless the
result is waste inefficient individual scrabbling that's it that's a quote from le Corbusier
the purely formal order was at least as important as the accommodation with the machine age
architecture he insisted is the art above all others which achieves a state of platonic grandeur
mathematical order speculation the perception of harmony that lies in emotional relationships
formal geometric simplicity and functional efficiency were not too distinct goals to
be balanced on the contrary formal order was a precondition of efficiency le Corbusier set himself
the task of inventing the ideal industrial city in which the general truths behind the machine age
would be expressed with graphic simplicity le Corbusier's new urban order was to be a lyrical
marriage between cartesian pure forms and the implacable requirements of the machine
in characteristically bombastic terms he declared we claim in the name of the steamship
the airplane and the automobile the right to health logic daring harmony perfection
under the existing city of Paris which to him resembled a porcupine that's a quote he wrote
about Paris as a porcupine and a vision of Dante's inferno his city would be a quote
organized serene forceful airy ordered entity and scott says it is impossible to read much of le
Corbusier or to see many of his architectural drawings without noticing his love mania for
simple repetitive lines in his horror of complexity he makes a personal commitment to
austere lines and represents that commitment as an essential characteristic of human nature
in his own words an infinity of combinations is possible when innumerable and diverse elements
are brought together but the human mind loses itself and becomes fatigued by such a labyrinth
of possibilities control becomes impossible the spiritual failure that must result is
disheartening reason is an unbroken straight line that's le Corbusier who might have had a little
something going on the cart in terms of you know saying the kinds of things one expects either of
somebody who is actively involved in shaping the society we live in or a complete psychotic
and le Corbusier's desire to design cities from thousands of feet in the air or from a hypothetical
perspective thousands of feet in the air was it was mirrored in his his tendency to place within
cities at their hierarchical centers you know these omnipotent towers of control you know
these omniscient anyway really both the towers to evaluate absolutely everything that was happening
and he always had as one would expect in a left-hemispheric dominant scenario
a real need to functionally segregate things compartmentalize and so you know design cities
that were like literally one entire section was residential and then one entire section was
industrial or whatever um that usually these are like absolute monolithic blocks with these
command and control towers at their center the first of le Corbusier's principles of urbanism
before even the death of the street was the dictum the plan dictator it would be difficult
to exaggerate the emphasis like Descartes le Corbusier placed on making the city the reflection
of a single rational plan he greatly admired roman camps and imperial cities for the overall
logic of their layouts he returned repeatedly to the contrast between the existing city
which is the product of historical chance in the city of the future which would be
consciously designed from start to finish following scientific principles the centralization
required by le Corbusier's doctrine of the plan always capitalized in his usage is replicated by
the centralization of the city itself functional segregation was joined to hierarchy his city
was a monosophalic city it's centrally located core performing the higher functions of the
metropolitan area this is how he described the business center of his plan for Paris
from its offices come the commands that put the world in order in fact the skyscrapers are the
brain of the city the brain of the whole country they embody the work of elaboration and command
on which all activities depend everything is concentrated there the tools that conquer time
and space telephones telegraphs radios the banks trading houses the organs of decisions for the
factories finance technology commerce le Corbusier but yeah it really really does sound exactly like
McGillchrist talking about the left hemisphere's tendency to create you know to want to create
a very concise visual schematic of the world but then to actually tend to want to impose
that schematic back on the world he talks a lot about Heidegger in the book and he talks about
Heidegger writing about this phenomenon of the world becoming a visual schematic
with the beginning of modernity our experience itself becomes increasingly pictorial as Heidegger
writes the world picture does not change from an earlier one into a modern one but rather the fact
that the world becomes picture at all is what distinguishes the essence of the modern age
this changes the nature of existence quote from Heidegger where the world becomes picture
the world is conceived and grasped as picture what is in its entirety is now taken in such a
way that in first is in being and only is in being to the extent that it is set up by man
who represents and sets forth Heidegger's animus was directed particularly against the impact of
Descartes who had written that the conduct of our life depends entirely on our senses and
sight is the noblest and most comprehensive of them this is precisely because Descartes was
concerned with vision as an instrument of clear sharply defined knowledge of each thing in isolation
a project impossible to reconcile with understanding based on the implicit context bound nature of
things as delivered by the right hemisphere which the left hemisphere only subsequently
represents and set forth as distinct items it is not by chance that the word distinct
implies division and so scott says of the Corbusé the visual aesthetic component of his bold plans
was central clean smooth lines were something he associated with the all business leanness of
the machine he was positively lyrical about the beauty of the machine and its products
and also of of post revolution of the Soviet Union what strikes an outside observer of this
revolution and culture and architecture is its emphasis on public forum on getting the visual
and aesthetic dimensions of the new world straight one can perhaps see this best in what
states calls the festivals of mustering organized by the cultural impressario of the early
soviet state and it's holy lunacharsky in the outdoor dramas he produced the revolution
was reenacted on a scale that must have seemed as large as the original with cannons bands
searchlights ships on the river 4 000 actors and 35 000 spectators whereas the actual revolution
had all the usual messiness of reality the reenactment called for military precision
and the various actors were organized by platoon and mobilized with semaphore and field telephones
like mass exercises the public spectacle gave a retroactive order purpose and central direction
to the events which were designed to impress the spectator not to reflect the historical facts
okay so there were two major instances in which le Corbusé's insane desire to create these
hyper abstract massive visual schema you know like tons of monumentalism and very few features
were actually implemented in reality to some degree and you know so one was in brazil brazilia
and one was the capital of an indian state i forget the name of it but both from what scott says
seem to share a disorienting nightmarish emptiness in imposing an inhuman monumentality a sense of
grandiose architectural scale that just kind of defeats human abilities and human interests
so they both feature for instance massive public squares that are almost entirely empty
precisely for the reason of their massiveness in abstract featureless geometricity for their lack
of variety providing points of reference that create a sense of place so to give a sense of how
the extent to which brazilia was designed as a kind of utopian project very much along the
corbusé's lines by other people but entirely in keeping with his standards and the extent to which
this city is one that is dreamed out of the world of ideal shapes is very well illustrated by this
passage from scott so the person who's talking about the person who actually did the designing
lucio costa costa's idea for it was no more than that was of a monumental axis to define the center
of the city which consisted of terraced embankments describing an arc intersected in its center
by a straight avenue and of a triangle to define the city's limits and to give a sense of the
extent to which this was to be a city with no context also from scott the great crossroads
that was the plan's point of departure has been variously interpreted as a symbol of christ's
cross or an amazonian bow costa however referred to it as a monumental axis the same term that
le corbusé used to describe the center of many of his urban plans even if the axis represented
a small attempt to assimilate brazilia in some way to its national tradition it remained a city
that could have been anywhere that provided no clue to its own history unless that history was the
modernist doctrine of sciam which is le corbusé's entity it was a state imposed city invented to
project a new brazil to brazilians into the world at large and it was a state imposed city in
at least one other sense in as much as it was a city to be created for civil servants many
aspects of life that might otherwise have been left to the private sphere were minutely organized
from domestic and residential matters to health services education child care recreation commercial
outlets and so forth and so you know le corbusé was horrified by the chaotic reality of people
like hanging out on the street and interacting with each other and all that you know talked
about the death of the street you know his plans were designed to eliminate the street in the squares
places of public life scott says you know so so he designed public squares that were just too
imposing for anybody to want to be in them or hang out or whatever he says scott says of brazilia
um a mere glance at the scenes of brazilia juxtaposed to the urban brazil that we have
been describing shows that once how radical is the transformation there are no streets in the
sense of public gathering places there are only roads and highways to be used exclusively by
motorized traffic there is a square but what a square the vast monumental plaza of the
three powers flanked by the esplanade of the ministries is of such a scale as to dwarf even
a military parade in comparison tianaman square and the red square are positively cozy and intimate
the plaza is best seen as are so many of le corbusé's plans from the air if one were to arrange to
meet a friend there it would be rather like trying to meet someone in the middle of the goby
and if one did meet up with one's friend there would be nothing to do
functional simplification demands that the rationale for the square as a public visiting room be
designed out of brazilia the plaza is a symbolic center for the state the only activity that
goes on around it is the work of the ministries whereas the vitality of the older square
depended on the mix of residents commerce and administration in its catchment area
those who work in the ministries must drive to their residences and then again to the separate
commercial centers of each residential area and then in terms of what it's actually like
to live in this place he says most of those who have moved to priscilla from other cities are
amazed to discover that it is a city without crowds people complain that priscilla lacks the
bustle of street life that it has none of the busy street corners and long stretches of
storefront facades that animate a sidewalk for pedestrians the disorienting quality of brazilia
is exacerbated by architectural repetition and uniformity here is a case where what seems like
rationality and legibility to those working in administration and urban services seems like
mystifying disorder for the ordinary residents who must navigate the city brazilia has few
landmarks each commercial quarter or superquadra cluster looks roughly like any other the sectors
of the city are designated by an elaborate set of acronyms and abbreviations that are nearly
impossible to master except from the global logic of the center holston notes the irony between
macro order and micro confusion thus while the topologies of total order produce an
unusual abstract awareness of the plan practical knowledge of the city actually decreases with
the imposition of systematic rationality so i think all of the foregoing goes a quite a long
way to characterizing the sense in which political systems of very disparate ideologies
have often converged on remarkably similar outcomes right the modern world in all of its
various permutations so often has this quality of not just being a nightmare but being a specific
variety of nightmare in which we must endure relentlessly cheerful propaganda from the
people who created the nightmare and not just any old relentlessly cheerful propaganda
but of a variety that declares that things are going great specifically because of the absolute
eternal scientific truths that you know they have discovered and implemented with 100 percent
perfect rigor to create this new society or to treat the imbalance of neurotransmitters that
are causing our depression or to create the logging plan that guarantees vibrant functioning
forests for generations to come right that's that's the quality that unites everything from
propaganda under Stalin about collectivization to you know people on cnn citing these random
abstract metrics from the market to you know tell people who can't make rent about how great
the economy is doing it's right and it's like what unites the discipline of psychiatry with the
practice of forestry it's uh it's just really this like you know even even when as is the case
of course with like various state ideologies and whatnot even when there is an ostensible or you
know the ostensible distinction between critical theory and scientific rationalism in its horrible
excesses when even when there's an ostensible radical disparity between two permutations
of modernity they often just do share these features and i think that gives us a very
very interesting valid basis to say that there could be something for the notion
that we would have to look for a different way to frame politics to be successful in
transforming the world in any way that we would actually want to do and in particular like you
know like what would be inferred as like this major lesson of of you know the 20th century i guess in
particular but you know also like say the french revolution and i'm sure some some things happened
to this century that's similar you know like this major inference would be that any given
system of thought any given like principle no matter how beautiful is perfectly capable of
being repurposed for horrible ends right and that a way to think that there's this tendency
that we have to assume that there is some set of abstractions that if implemented correctly
are you know like sufficiently accurate descriptors of social conditions that
they they would just shape society in the right way or whatever and that that actually
really just might not be the right way to think about it that any any abstraction that we can formulate
can be followed in two literal a manner that one could get too lost in the model
and that from that perspective you know forced collectivization in the soviet union could
look like an egalitarian utopian move right you know so i would argue for the politics of wholeness
versus the politics of division and because of the nature of the opponent processors
that comprise us that's also a politics of experience versus abstraction and so it's not
what i am not saying when i'm saying that maybe left and right aren't really good frames it's just
because it's too abstract it's just because the notions of anti hierarchical um politics
are too abstract to be functionally like good guarantees of social conditions
it's so it's not i'm not you know like saying that people should give up those values i'm
saying that people should think of them in concrete terms in actual situations like situations that
they're experiencing rather than you know generating these massive schema that are supposed to guide the
developments of social conditions for all eternity or whatever um and i think in particular that
helps us understand um i've talked before about how we should look not at the ideology of political
systems but at the psychologies of those with power in them um and i do still think that's very true
and you know that from that perspective uh traits like a total lack of empathy
uh become rather apparent and rather salient but um at the level of like adherence of political
doctrines or participants in political movements um you know i i think that there does have to be
acknowledged that systems like you know the soviet union in its most brutal manifestations did
actually receive uh considerable support from people who uh who expressed that support because
they believed in some version of the egalitarian utopian propaganda that the soviet union produced
and that this is as far as we will get into left authoritarian psychology today we will
absolutely do more of that in some future episode but that the best way to think of that psychology
is in these terms of tending to rigidly adhere to a model right that is very specifically that to
believe that through some perfect process of axiomatic logic a society has been like
scientifically engineered that is perfect right and to just absolutely believe that
because according to the logic of the model everything that's happening should be
characteristic of an egalitarian utopia that the soviet union is one you know and so like
thinking of that nature of that variety the the lost in the model aspect feels really in the
rigid adherence to its logic feels very central but we'll we'll go into it way more here's
McGillichrist on the french revolution on that tendency for the logic the abstract logic of
equality to uh end up having some kind of terrible monstrous application or another
the left hemisphere misunderstands the importance of implicitness there is therefore a problem for it
that certain logically desirable goals simply cannot be directly pursued because direct pursuit
changes their nature and they flee from approach thus the direct pursuit of liberty equality
and fraternity despite being fine ideals is problematic the french revolution famously
championed liberty equality and fraternity the problem with bringing them to the fore as concepts
and going for them explicitly left hemisphere fashion rather than allowing them to emerge as
the necessary accompaniment of a certain tolerance disposition towards the world right
hemisphere fashion is that they can only be negative entities once they become the province
of the left hemisphere so that's the world we live in we're in a feedback loop of technology
and biology just to to kind of review what we've gone over in the last few episodes you know there's
this pretty strong evidence for some degree of conflict between the right and left brain
hemispheres totally irreconcilable modes of processing and for the the left hemisphere
wanting to build systems and and kind of like you know in keeping with its its fundamental
deep evolutionary history of being associated with grasping and abstraction
and separation it has a tendency to want to kind of like capture the dynamics of brain
processing in a way that the right hemisphere really doesn't and it does seem that as we have
become more technically apt and spent more and more time you know trying to concentrate on
things and freezing images in time and manipulating abstract schema of the world for one purpose or
another that it has involved some actual like suppression of our right brain hemisphere's
activity and that this is actually where handedness comes from that it's not the case that there has
been this massive expansion in the left hemisphere of the brain promoting you know a dexterity in
our right hand or language or rather that there's been a suppression of growth and development in
the right brain hemisphere as a result of precisely that long-term evolutionary scenario
of trying to suppress the right brain's activity to achieve some technical end or another
and that those tendencies grow the more that we're interacting with a reality that we have created
the more that you know we're making tools or we're using tools or we're sitting around in
boxes that consist exclusively of 90 degree angles staring at screens that consist exclusively
of 90 degree angles looking at one you know two-dimensional representations of reality
on a flat plane right you know that that this process is feeding back on itself in a very big
way that there were you know there's phases of this throughout the the long course of evolution
that you know created handedness and the asymmetry of brain structure in terms of of like you know
like chipping stone tools and stuff like that making maps of the of the landscape in our head
and things like that but that as we have continued to just kind of make more and more of the
environment that we inhabit that the process is probably like really intensifying one one
interesting facet of that one way that that might that might be seen to be playing out to
to further validate this characterization of the modern world as an essentially psychotic
phenomenon is the the reality that as the as the internet took over everybody's lives
and everybody spent you know again like there's this crazy proliferation of new world views and
you know new mythology is happening right now because of the internet but again like as much
as some shocked commentator in Vox or whatever might describe these things as these new world views
as like descents into utter irrationality the people who are spending all that time promulgating
them and adhering to the accepting them and adhering to them are actually engaged in what
they feel is some kind of process of like hyper rational inquiry right where they're you know
they're putting together all the pieces and seeing all the connections and coming up with
worldviews that sound increasingly like the fantasies of people with paranoid delusions
we are becoming as a society more and more like that as McGillchrist says the left hemisphere is
competitive and its concern its prime motivation is power if the working relationship were to
become disturbed so that the left hemisphere appeared to have primacy or become the end
point or final staging post on the processing of experience the world would change into something
quite different and we can say fairly clearly what that would be like it would be relatively
mechanical an assemblage of more or less disconnected parts it would be relatively
abstract and disembodied relatively distanced from fellow feeling given to explicitness
utilitarian and ethic overconfident of its own take on reality and lacking insight into its problems
the neuropsychological evidence is that these are all aspects of the left hemisphere world as
compared with the right and isn't that just the world we live in right you know from the
physical spaces we inhabit these lines on 90 degree angles that separate us from one another
in our houses from the clear cuts that divide forests from the pens that we use to separate
animals from the world and each other from the dissection that we undertake of those animals to
further subdivide them take them out of their context and take them apart to you know the
capacity of industrial resource extraction to take apart a whole mountain see what's underneath
um and certainly between us and you know like the the right's desire to create physical hierarchies
that separate people with things like border walls and prisons but but also with what has become
a lot of the left with this retreat of politics into symbolic reality of this incessant concern
with creating epistemic barriers between uh to comprehension between people with different
experiences of socialization right so like in one case as we would expect because the right fights
for power in the physical world more than the left um you know in one case it's a matter of creating
divisions with like concrete and razor wire but in the other case it's a matter of creating
divisions with language in both cases it represents a prevailing orientation of the left brain hemisphere
it would probably be pretty fair to say that we have completely lost our way there's homework at the
end of this episode friends if you want to do it and that is that I would really encourage
going back to and uh the story I told at the beginning of the episode and setting ourselves
up for the journey ahead of us um just to literally think about at the level of your experience um
the if you can identify a sort of conflict of the variety that would be characteristic of
right left brain hemisphere processing differences as we've described them thus far
um that just specifically has this kind of subjective quality of trying to impose order
on one's experience but then wanting to like actually like arrest experience in order to
do that in some fashion trying to simplify or stop or change the sort of like what's perceived
as the sort of default or inevitable sort of like flow of experience and you know to like kind of
halt it and put more order or some more rationally specified shape onto it in some manner or another
um and if one can identify such tendencies in one's own subjective reality I I don't know
how like how much that is like a conscious and consistent part of people's experiences it is of
mine and so when I read McGill Christ I felt like I could recognize a lot of my own experience
but you know if you if you find something recognizably like that in your own world
you know like I guess like just the question of the extent to which that sense of rigor or that
sense of perfect rationality or discipline or whatever it is is actually that conducive to
functional behavior actual comprehension we know whatever whatever domain it lives in
if it actually achieves its mandate and so in the next episode I I am going to tell quite a
few stories but I'm going to try to describe some like exercises because I really do want to get
into describing revolutionary processes at the level of individual experience
and you know so I'm going to be trying to describe like some ways to break out of the traps
that we get into or I don't know I guess really what I'm going to be describing is
ways that I found out of traps but I'm going to hope that that's helpful to people that
if people can empathize with my experience you know as much as I talked about some things that
happened that were awful there should be some empathetic level on which it is apparent to you
that I am okay and you know I'll talk more about about how to endure great tragedy by accepting
you know accepting our worst sense of what it could possibly mean of divesting ourselves of that
left hemisphere tendency to draw lines in our experience and say this is happening because
I like it and this isn't happening because I don't like it and to like break down those lines and let
the dark chaotic bottomless depths of experience erupt forth into this great strange beautiful
world in which we are embedded and in which in fact we are completely continuous with everything
else good night friends